Steven Beard named as RFIB & Limehouse holding company CFO

20th November 2017 - Author: Staff Writer

Steven Beard has been appointed to Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of RFIB and Limehouse holding company and to Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of newly created services company, George Yard Services (GYS), effective December 4th, 2017.

Beard joins from a role as Group CEO of technology and professional services firm Agilisys, which grew under his management to become one of the largest employee owned businesses in the UK.

CEO, Dennis Mahoney, said; “Steven is a landmark appointment for our business. He brings an exceptional track record to our CFO function and is the ideal candidate to launch and build our new central services business.

“Steven has pioneered the use of new technologies throughout his career and this approach will be central to GYS and across the RFIB and Limehouse businesses. GYS will be a key pillar in our business portfolio. It will enable our broking and underwriting teams to focus on what they do best and will ensure we continue to attract leading talent who share our independent, client focused approach.”

Prior to Agilisys, he held a number of senior positions at process and technology firm Xchanging’s  UK and U.S. operations.

When Xchanging listed on the London Stock Exchange in 2007 he was responsible for the largest part of the group, including XIS and XCS.

He has also served as CFO of Redwave, the UK based venture capital business.

“RFIB is renowned for its independence, the calibre of its broking teams and its absolute focus on providing top quality service to clients,” Beard said; “Limehouse is being established based on similar principles. GYS will support and enhance both – it will be a centre of excellence for services that will support RFIB on its growth trajectory and Limehouse as it builds a market leading position. I look forward to working with Dennis and the team to support and drive growth across the Group.”

GYS was created to provide back office support to RFIB and Limehouse, and will offer finance, risk, compliance, HR, IT and company secretariat.


