Prudential develops digital claims solutions for hospitals

28th June 2018 - Author: Matt Sheehan

Prudential Hong Kong Limited has developed two new digital solutions to streamline the way consumers and medical professionals manage hospital claims in Hong Kong.

Its new ‘Hospital to Prudential’ portal is designed to provide a simple, paperless hospital claims process for both customers and operators, while its Chatbot Claims platform aims to use artificial intelligence (AI) to cut claims submission time to three minutes.

“In this digital era, customers increasingly demand a convenient, reliable and secure insurance claims experience,” said Sam Lim, Chief Transformation Officer at Prudential. “These innovations respond to customers’ evolving needs and herald a milestone in the evolution of insurance claims in Hong Kong.”

Upon admission to hospital, ‘Hospital to Prudential’ will immediately commence the claim process once patients input basic information such as their name, HKID number, and contact phone number, and will encrypt and electronically submit the claims documents to be processed by Prudential after the patient is discharged.

The portal will also support a wide range of Prudential’s medical products and hospital cash plans, and will be available to Prudential customers at the Gleneagles Hong Kong Hospital from July 2018.

Additionally, more than 90% of Prudential’s medical protection products will be supported by Chatbot Claims, which will help financial consultants process claims of any amount.

Financial consultants will be able to interact with the AI chatbot on their tablets, providing them with an instant response regarding the required data and documents, and reducing the claims submission time by 75% compared to paper-based submissions.

Lim continued: “Listening and understanding is at the core of Prudential’s customer-centric culture. We are confident our digital innovations will create new standards in the industry.

“These initiatives, together with Prudential’s existing industry-leading digital service offerings, demonstrate our commitment to embracing technology to deliver a seamless end-to-end digital experience to customers.”


