Munich Re U.S. adds InsurTech innovation role, appoints Mozeika

24th January 2017 - Author: Steve Evans

Reinsurance giant Munich Re has created a new role in the U.S. as it seeks to help its clients seize opportunities resulting from the InsurTech wave and technological developments in risk transfer business.

Robert Mozeika has been appointed to the newly created Innovation Executive at Munich Reinsurance America, Inc., the global reinsurers U.S. unit.

“Munich Re continues to quickly develop its position as a global innovation leader in the insurance industry, and is at the forefront of changes taking place in InsurTech, helping clients derive the most value from emerging opportunities,” commented Steve Levy, President, Reinsurance Division, Munich Re, US.

“Given our presence in Silicon Valley and other leading innovation hubs around the world, we’ve developed relationships with the key players and startups that are driving the InsurTech revolution. Our goal is to identify opportunities and collaborate with clients to bring to market new insurance solutions and products coming out of InsurTech,” he continued.

In this role, Mozeika will work alongside Munich Re, U.S.’s Client Management team to “match reinsurance clients with new products and solutions developed in the InsurTech space that help address specific client needs.”

Munich Re also expects that the position will present it with new business opportunities as its clients increasingly pursue InsurTech alternatives to doing insurance and reinsurance business.

“This is an integral role for the Reinsurance Division and is a natural evolution for Bob who has established a leadership position in the InsurTech space. With his knowledge of technology trends, his extensive network in this area and his consultative experience, Bob is a perfect fit to provide this valuable service to our clients,” Levy explained.

Mozeika has served as a Munich Re, US Innoscout, based in Silicon Valley, since January 2015, working alongside and partnering with technology and InsurTech companies to enhance Munich Re’s business processes for developing new emerging products and also exploring new business models.

From 2008 to 2014 he worked as the Head of Financial and Strategic Management and Underwriting Operations in the Reinsurance Division of Munich Re, US.

Mozeika will serve as a member of the Reinsurance Division Leadership Team in the new role, reporting directly to Levy, and will be based in Princeton while maintaining strong connections to Silicon Valley.


