Munich Re partners with insurtech Betterview for drone imagery, analysis, reporting

18th January 2018 - Author: Steve Evans

Global reinsurance player Munich Re has entered into a partnership with insurance technology and drone start-up Betterview, that will see the Munich Reinsurance America, Inc. unit offering drone imagery, analysis and reporting to its insurance company clients.

Munich Re will refer any of its insurance company clients that might benefit from the building and property data, analysis and insights that Betterview offers, after which interested insurers can purchase Betterview’s services for a fee.

Betterview provides property inspection services by drone, capturing high-resolution images of residential and commercial properties using its remote-controlled pilotless aircraft.

The company also offers a cloud-based software suite, allowing customers to organise, store and analyse the images captured by its drones, to support an insurance company’s underwriting inspection, loss control and claims adjustment processes.

“We are always looking to collaborate and drive innovation activities with our insurance company clients,” commented Tim Brockett, Senior Vice President, Munich Re. “Not only are we impressed with Betterview’s technical capabilities, we believe that their commitment to creating value for the insurance industry really sets them apart from their competitors in the drone space, delivering high-level data, analysis and insights into buildings and properties.”

“We are extremely proud that Munich Re selected Betterview as its referral partner,” David Lyman and Dave Tobias, Co-Founders of Betterview explained. “With the close of our series seed funding round in September, Betterview is uniquely positioned to meet the evolving needs of Munich Re’s clients.

“Over the last few months, we have invested heavily into the expansion of our engineering and operations teams. This expansion has allowed us to focus on broadening our machine learning/computer vision capabilities, enhancing our software platform, creating new partnerships, as well as launching a soon to be released version two of our mobile application,” Lyman and Tobias added.


