MS Amlin partners with Cytora for AI driven commercial property underwriting

20th June 2018 - Author: Luke Gallin

Global insurer and reinsurer MS Amlin has announced a new partnership with artificial intelligence (AI) firm Cytora, which sees AI technology deployed into commercial underwriting processes to improve and assist with the automation of decisions throughout MS Amlin’s commercial property portfolio.

The new partnership will see MS Amlin use Cytora’s solutions that are powered by its Risk Engine technology, with the aim of improving underwriting performance and to drive premium growth across the re/insurer’s commercial portfolio.

MS Amlin will be able to use Cytora’s Terminal platform, and the AI firm will also provide the re/insurer with risk scores via its Risk Engine API integration with Acturis, which should improve risk selection and pricing in MS Amlin’s SME automated trading book, with a view to significantly grow premiums over the next three years.

Dr. Paul Taffinder, Director of Strategy & Innovation, MS Amlin, commented: “AI technology is transforming the way insurers do business. This new and exciting partnership with Cytora is a testament to MS Amlin’s commitment to digital innovation and the use of smart technology, further cementing our position as an insurer of the future.”

Richard Hartley, Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Cytora, added: “We’re excited to partner with MS Amlin, an ambitious insurer and proven market leader who shares our vision to make insurance more frictionless and data-driven. The opportunities AI opens up for the insurance industry are vast, from improving profitability and reducing expenses, to providing more practical cover that is easy to access and seamless to purchase. Cytora is dedicated to making this possible.”

Ted Aerts, Head of Strategy, Digital & Operations P&C, MS Amlin, said: “MS Amlin’s underwriting knowledge and specialist expertise, aligned to Cytora’s technology, is a formidable combination.  We are focused on increasing digital integration, improving operational efficiency and the user experience for our brokers and clients, and this partnership with Cytora helps us improve all three. We look forward to working with the team at Cytora.”


