InsurTech start-up Wrisk makes three leadership appointments

9th April 2018 - Author: Matt Sheehan

InsurTech start-up Wrisk has expanded its leadership team with the appointments of Nimeshh Patel as Chief Operating Officer (COO), Stewart Duncan as Chief Data Officer, and Sima Patel as Head of Marketing.

Nimeshh Patel has already served as a member of Wrisk’s advisory Board, and will support the company’s goal of transforming the way people buy, maintain, and claim insurance with his 20 years’ experience in building international businesses centred around data technology.

He joins Wrisk from Buzzfeed Europe, where he was most recently Vice President of Business Operations and Strategy, and has also served as Vice President, Europe, Middle-East and Africa (EMEA) at Drawbridge, and as COO at AOL Europe.

Wrisk also welcomes Stewart Duncan, who joins the company from Simply Business, where, as Chief Analytics Officer, he created a data culture that helped deliver a £400 million valuation and successful exit to Travelers Insurance.

He also brings experience in developing and managing international data and analytics teams from roles at Hotels.com (part of Expedia) and Sony Computer Entertainment.

Finally, as Head of Marketing, Sima Patel will utilise her 17 years’ experience in digital and product marketing, which includes roles as Head of Product Marketing at StubHub (an ebay company), Vice President for the EMEA Digital team at BlackRock, and eMarketing Manager at Schroders.

Niall Barton, Chief Executive Officer (CEO)of Wrisk, said: “Here at Wrisk we’ve got big ambitions – we’re giving insurance a much-needed digital upgrade to make the buying, maintaining and claiming on different types of insurance easy and painless. But we also know that we’re only as good as the people we hire.

“Fortunately, we’re building a truly exceptional team, and we’re delighted to be able to welcome Nimeshh, Stewart and Sima into the Wrisk family.”

Wrisk is currently developing a smartphone app which it expects to be launched later in the year after being trialled as part of the Financial Conduct Authority’s (FCA) Sandbox programme.


