JLT Re launches economic capital modelling solution ANSER

19th January 2018 - Author: Steve Evans

Reinsurance broker JLT Re has launched its own economic capital modelling solution for clients, named ANSER, ANalytics Software for the Evaluation of Risk.

ANSER has been developed with the help of Ultimate Risk Solutions (URS), a leading independent economic capital modelling (ECM) software developer and has been designed to provide a comprehensive, user-friendly ECM suite of tools.

Mike Reynolds, Global CEO, JLT Re, explained, “In today’s market, ECM technology must meet a wide range of demands and must do so in a way that is personalised for each client’s unique specifications. ANSER is the ECM tool suite which can be completely tailored to individual clients’ needs. JLT Re prides itself on providing bespoke analytical insights – as opposed to blanket solutions – and we will be delivering these with ANSER.”

The launch of the tool means that JLT Re will be able to offer clients a customised interface that will subsequently support what it calls “the most comprehensive” suite of new analytical and strategic advisory tools.

David Flandro, Global head of Analytics, JLT Re, elaborated, “ANSER is custom-built for the client, whether you are in North America, EMEA, LatAm or Asia. The tool suite is underpinned by a user-friendly ECM which can be used for pricing, portfolio modelling, reserve analysis, and predictive modelling. It includes rating agency, regulatory capital, franchise value and strategic expansion (STEM) modules and much more. Users may incorporate the building blocks most pertinent to them creating powerful insights and competitive advantages.”

Tim Trainor, Executive Director of Business Development, URS, added, “We have found JLT Re’s culture and focus a great fit for URS; we are excited about this new relationship and the opportunity to develop ANSER with JLT Re. The drive to work from the ground up and understand the real needs of clients is refreshing and gives us complete confidence in the relevance and success of the work we are doing together.”

Mike Reynolds also said, “Over the coming months we will be speaking to clients and updating the market on the development of ANSER.”


