Inefficient communication costs a hospital $1.7 million a year

July 15, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 15, 2014 - The average US hospital loses $1.7 million a year due to poor coordination and communication among members of staff, according to a new report from the Ponemon Institute and Imprivata, and may be draining up to $11 billion from the nationwide health system every twelve months.  The survey found that providers wasted 54% of the time involved in patient admissions, transfers, and the coordination of emergency response teams while waiting for answers from other members of staff due to the lack of secure text messaging and other speedy forms of communication.
Despite becoming obsolete more than a decade ago among consumers, providers still often rely on pagers to coordinate with other members of staff.  Fifty-two percent of providers cite the inefficiency of pagers as one of the primary reasons they are forced to waste time during key patient events, including 33 minutes during admissions, 40 minutes when coordinating an emergency response team, and 35 minutes during a patient transfer.
In 2013, the Pennsylvania Patient Safety Authority warned providers that breakdowns in communication during these important events can lead to serious harm, including a failure to accurately document and relay medication orders.  Nearly 70% of adverse medication events occurred during medication reconciliation upon admission, while 8.6% occurred during a transfer.
“This study confirms what I experience first-hand as a physician—inefficient communications has a significant impact on clinical workflows and patient care coordination. Pagers and other outdated technologies are no longer effective, and providers want more efficient, effective solutions for communication and care coordination,” said Dr. Sean Kelly, chief medical officer at Imprivata.
Dig Deeper
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
Payers, Providers Make Dental Care a Population Health Issue
“Technology should eliminate, not create, barriers to delivering effective patient care, which is why clinical and IT staffs need to work together to implement solutions that enable fast, efficient communication to improve provider productivity for better focus on patient care,” Kelly said.
The study suggests that secure text messaging can help to close some of the significant communication gaps that have developed in provider workflows, estimating that providers can save a total of 58 minutes across the three major areas with the use of mobile devices.  Trimming nearly an hour off these processes may save $918,000 per hospital and $5.88 billion across the healthcare system each year.
Implementing more efficient means of communication may have a particularly profound effect on organizations where quality impacts financial reimbursement, adds Dr. Thomas Kloos, Executive Director for the Atlantic Management Service Organization, which includes the Atlantic ACO, part of Atlantic Health System “Efficient communication and collaboration amongst providers is critical to the coordination and delivery of patient care, especially within an ACO where quality is impacted in part by the promptness of care delivery,” said Kloos.
Secure text messaging “gives our providers a robust tool for increasing communications efficiency across our entire ACO network, which improves provider productivity, reduces unnecessary patient readmissions, increases clinical integration within the ACO and most importantly, allows patients to more quickly receive the care they require,” Kloos says.
Tagged Care CoordinationHealth Information ManagementQuality Of Care


