ACO facilitators provide valuable help for finances, analytics

July 31, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 31, 2014 - Accountable care organizations (ACOs) are popping up left, right, and center as providers band together to accept risk and leverage the power of partnerships to face the myriad challenges of a changing industry.  From improving care quality through pay-for-performance reimbursements to sharing investments in clinical analytics and population health management technology, ACOs have become a proven way to lower costs and increase care coordination across the healthcare spectrum.
However, despite the rapid expansion of the accountable care model, providers looking to transform their businesses don’t always know the right path to take.  Enter the ACO facilitator, brought into the limelight by Dr. Farzad Mostashari earlier this year.  Facilitators can provide valuable expertise to nascent ACOs, says Laura Beerman, Director of Customer Segment Analysis at Decision Resources Group, and are becoming a popular and effective way for providers to ensure success in the value-based healthcare environment.
Beerman sat down with HealthITAnalytics to discuss the rise of facilitators and how ACOs can make the most of their important new partnerships.
Why should an ACO consider hiring a facilitator?
From an accumulation of data and qualitative information over the past two to three years, you start seeing trends.  There are so many differences between what the ACO 1.0 looked like and what the ACO 2.0 looked like.  Now we’re getting to the ACO 3.0, and it’s becoming increasingly clear that this is not an area where providers can go it alone anymore.
READ MORE: CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
There are so many things about existing operations that can be fine-tuned, even things like the EHR.  Some providers and integrated delivery networks may have been on the forefront of adopting electronic medical records, but just having the information is not enough anymore.  You often need additional plug-in software to pull information out of that EHR to aggregate data and to assist with ACO tracking.  That’s really going to help an ACO succeed, whereas an EHR alone does not.
What are some of the challenges that ACOs are facing?
It can be very difficult to track requirements when you have accountable care agreements with more than one payer.  Even if some of the measures overlap, you’re dealing with each payer’s claim data, and the systems for reporting and receiving that data, with different reporting periods for the same physician.  A physician might have to juggle multiple performance areas.
When talking to some of the Pioneer ACOs, especially when there were lower than expected performance scores, several of them sort of chalked it up to reporting issues.  In the case of one Pioneer ACO, they had specifically made the decision not to invest as fully as they could have in advancing their quality reporting.  They wanted to see how things were going to work in their first year.  But I imagine if it didn’t turn out very well for them, they are probably going to look at increasing their investment.
I always think about who would want to be a provider right now.  Things have gotten more difficult, and a lot of times their margins are already so small or they have already squeezed all the excess costs out of their systems that they can. If you want to keep running an ACO and keeping it successful, you might just need a partner to come in and help you reach that next level.
READ MORE: CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
What should an ACO look for when researching partnerships with facilitators?
Broadly, I would ask if this facilitator have the capabilities or the tech solutions to come in and help the provider do what they have so far been unable to do themselves.  Again, they may have an advanced EHR, but we’re really beyond just straight EHRs at this point.
Another trend we see is actuarial firms working as consultants with ACOs because for the first time, the provider might be taking on risk, and they’ve got to maybe design or revamp what their incentive program looks like, or what their pay for performance structures will be.  Bringing in an accounting expert can be really important for some organizations.
Under the new constructs, you really can’t afford to make a poor choice when it comes to who you’re going to partner with.  I mean it happens all the time.  You hear about health systems that spend massive, huge amounts of money on an EHR that ends up not working for them.  So I would imagine at this point, the due-diligence is pretty intense.
This is anecdotal and not really technical, but I would say, in general, anybody who calls themselves an expert in ACOs is overstating.  There are too many niche areas.  I think that’s part of why we’re seeing the growth of facilitators.  There are so many areas that an outside institute can come into and potentially help an ACO be successful.
READ MORE: Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
You might be on the technical side.  You might be on the financial side.  You might be on the contracting side.  So there’s plenty to go around, but it’s so important for providers to make the best possible choice choices for the short-term and for the long-term.
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsCare CoordinationPay for Performance


