WEDI Appoints Charles Stellar as Interim President and CEO

January 20, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 20, 2016 - After the abrupt departure of Devin Jopp, EdD, from WEDI’s top post last week, the health information exchange and data governance organization has announced the appointment of Charles W. Stellar to fill the void.
Stellar, who most recently served as Executive Vice President of America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), has more than 35 years of experience in executive healthcare leadership.  His duties at AHIP included shaping and disseminating consistent messaging for the association of payers, as well as overseeing its membership ranks.
“We are honored that Charles has agreed to serve in this role and propel our organization forward during this transitional period,” said Jean Narcisi, chair of the WEDI board. “In addition to the close working relationships he shares with many of the member organizations on our board, he brings unparalleled domain experience in successfully bringing healthcare associations to national prominence. We expect he will continue our efforts to further WEDI’s role as a recognized leader and advocate for healthcare IT.”
Stellar has also served in top leadership roles at the American Managed Care and Review Association (AMCRA), Healthmaster HMO/IPA, the American Association of Foundations for Medical Care, and American Association of the Professional Standards Review Association (PSRO).
Dig Deeper
Unfiltered EHR Data Overloads Physicians, Perpetuates Burnout
Provider Data Management Offers Payers a Blockchain Use Case
What Healthcare IT Users Don’t Really Need to Know about FHIR
“This year will be instrumental for WEDI as we continue to work closely with the industry to implement exciting new initiatives, drive awareness of healthcare’s ongoing challenges, and collectively improve the quality and efficiency of healthcare IT,” Stellar commented.
“I want to take this opportunity to thank our dedicated board, executive workgroups, loyal sponsors and diverse membership base for placing its confidence in WEDI as we prepare for what will be an exciting Spring Conference and a year full of promise and progress.”
Tagged Health Information ExchangeHealthcare Data GovernanceInteroperability


