Does Stage 3 Adequately Address Health Data Interoperability?

June 02, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 02, 2015 - The American Medical Association (AMA) is taking issue with the future of the EHR Incentive Programs and the impending finalization of the Stage 3 meaningful use proposed rule.  In a letter to CMS and ONC executives, the AMA voices its concerns with how the proposal addresses health data interoperability and the patient safety impacts of implementing complex EHR and data exchange technologies, cautioning rule makers against repeating past mistakes related to the stunted maturity of the nation’s health IT infrastructure.
Health data interoperability is at the crux of the industry’s efforts to build a learning health system, yet the chronic lack of fluid, complete, and accurate health information exchange is preventing providers from taking full advantage of the growing number of big data analytics and population health management offerings that hope to improve patient safety, care coordination, and the quality of care. 
While meaningful use has always aimed to provide guidance, structure, and attainable targets for providers intrepid enough to make the investment, the financial and administrative strains of participation have always prompted a certain amount of backlash.
Stage 3 threatens to push providers too far, the AMA says, based on little evidence that existing EHR infrastructure is capable of handling the heightened requirements or solving the deeply-seated problems and unanticipated impacts of health IT on patient safety, privacy and security, value-based reimbursement, and health data interoperability. 
And to complicate matters further, writes James L. Madara, MD, Executive Vice President and CEO of the AMA, newly announced quality reporting programs like the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) have not been sufficiently described to give providers a clear idea of what they’re getting into.
“The AMA strongly supports the widespread adoption of health information technology (health IT) and believes that efforts should be made to encourage the use of new tools that can improve patient care,” says the letter addressed to Andrew Slavitt, Acting CMS Administrator and National Coordinator Karen DeSalvo. “EHRs and health IT, however, introduce new kinds of risks and challenges into an already complex health care environment. While we are becoming aware of these concerns, a full understanding of these issues and their solutions is not yet known by stakeholders.”
Scarce evidence about the impact of health IT on patient safety has highlighted ongoing struggles with EHR usability, workflows, alarm fatigue, and care coordination.  While CMS recently released statistics that show a 17 percent decrease in adverse events thanks to greater health IT adoption and a focus on care coordiation, EHRs remain a chief concern for clinicians and patient safety organizations that identify poor data integrity, lax documentation, unintuitive workflows, and insufficient medical device integration as major risks for patient care.
“The AMA echoes these concerns – if we do not focus on improving usability and the design of EHRs, harm to patients will result,” Madara says. “Part of the problem is that the necessary solutions to mitigate against patient safety events are still unknown. Moreover, contract clauses continue to preclude physicians from speaking freely about patient safety issues, further concealing these problems.”
The proposed rule for Stage 3 meaningful use adds to these worries by requiring vendors to focus so closely on certification criteria that workflow improvements and usability innovations that may increase patient safety fall by the wayside.  “The proposed rule, nonetheless, continues to expand the amount of data collected and stored in EHRs, heightens decision support requirements, and creates new workflow challenges without addressing these growing safety problems,” the letter says.
Overburdened vendors are also unable to focus on the health information exchange and health data interoperability features that would not only help providers meet increased data collecting and quality reporting criteria, but also meet the challenges of population health management and cost-cutting that will help them succeed under the new MIPS framework, mandated as part of the sustainable growth rate repeal earlier in 2015.
But CMS still has to tell providers what exactly those new requirements will be, the AMA notes, and it doesn’t make sense to finalize Stage 3 when the future of the EHR Incentive Programs is still so uncertain.
The new MIPS program “will require alignment, resources, and new regulations, transforming MU from a stand-alone program to one component of a larger reporting system,” the AMA says. “Rather than create all of the new requirements and program changes for Stage 3 now, CMS should consider these changes as it develops and implements the MIPS program. This will save physicians from the heavy lift of a new program that is subsequently altered again in future rulemaking.”
None of that future rulemaking should ask providers to undertake health data interoperability requirements that the industry’s EHR infrastructure cannot yet support, the letter adds.  “We continue to believe that the ONC certification process is driving EHR development at the expense of innovation and patient and physician needs,” says Madara.
“Requiring health care providers to move more data electronically, and to do so using systems that do no interoperate, is not only unfair, but is counterproductive and will not solve the barriers that currently exist.”
While private industry efforts are working steadily to increase health data interoperability across vendor systems and between healthcare providers, the latest EHR certification criteria may not do much to aid those organizations, the AMA says.  Instead of overly-prescriptive certification criteria, providers and vendors should be allowed to work together to pilot new technologies that encourage interoperability while simultaneously addressing the patient safety concerns and usability issues that have plagued clinicians thus far.
“Instead of finding solutions, we are very concerned the Administration is looking to fix interoperability by simply expanding the use of certified products, including going beyond the MU program,” states the AMA. “Moving more data does not equal greater interoperability and adopting more products that have the same barriers to data exchange will also not improve the current state of this technology.”
“We strongly recommend a certification program that remains focused on cornerstone issues integral to interoperability, such as standardized vocabularies, patient matching, privacy, security, and high value use cases.”
“We understand the goal of streamlining and simplifying the program, but believe that there should be opportunities for physicians to seek out alternative pathways that may drive innovation in the future, including promoting telemedicine, digital health beyond EHRs, and other novel approaches to delivering care,” Madara concludes.  “CMS and ONC should work together to foster pilot programs that offer the opportunity to test new technology and new ways of engaging patients and coordinating care as part of the final stage of meaningful use.”
The AMA offers detailed suggestions about how to improve the current Stage 3 meaningful use criteria to ease the strain on the provider community, including offering an initial 90-day reporting period for new entrants, reducing the full-year reporting requirement to allow for flexible EHR implementation, and providing greater privacy and security safeguards for sensitive patient data. 
To read the AMA’s full breakdown of the Stage 3 provisions and its proposals for changes, access the complete letter here.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureCMS Meaningful UseEHR InteroperabilityPatient Safety


