New Pittsburgh Data Alliance Focuses on Big Data Analytics

March 16, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 16, 2015 - Healthcare organizations in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania are teaming up to leverage big data analytics in pursuit of new healthcare technologies and treatments.  The Pittsburgh Health Data Alliance, a newly announced collaboration between Carnegie Mellon University, the University of Pittsburgh, and the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC), intends to ramp up patient engagement, help providers make quicker and more accurate diagnoses, and foster new jobs in precision medicine.
“We are unlocking the potential of data to tackle some of our nation’s biggest challenges: raising the quality and reducing the cost of health care,” said UPMC CEO Jeffrey Romoff. “Not only will this effort benefit patients, but it also will accelerate Pittsburgh’s revitalization.”
“The complementary strengths of the alliance’s partner institutions will allow us to re-imagine health care for millions of people in our shared, data-driven world,” added Subra Suresh, president of CMU. “Through this collaboration, we will move more rapidly to immediate prevention and remediation, further accelerate the development of evidence-based medicine, and augment disease-centered models with patient-centered models of care.”
The alliance will bring big data analytics to bear on the problem of developing and commercializing new technologies that have measurable impact on the healthcare continuum.
Dig Deeper
FDA Holds App-a-Thon for Precision Medicine, Next-Gen Genomics
NIH Opens Up “All of Us” to Research Participants Nationwide
Most Patients Eager to Join Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort
The three organizations will bring together experts in computer sciences, machine learning, clinical care, and commercialization to turn the region into a hotbed of innovation.  Researchers will explore ways to leverage EHR data, genomics, medical devices, claims data, and wearable sensors to improve population health management, personalize care, and bring predictive data analytics to patients and providers.
“Through this partnership, our brilliant scientists at Pitt and CMU will have unprecedented resources for turning their innovative ideas into products and services that can truly better the lives of patients and society,” said Patrick Gallagher, chancellor of the University of Pittsburgh. “The knowledge created here will result in the spin-off of many new companies and thousands of new jobs over the next decade.”
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsMedical Research


