Baltimore Population Health Plan Focuses on Racial Disparities

September 02, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 02, 2016 - Baltimore’s struggles with racial inequality have been a fixture in national headlines in recent months, and its troubling population health disparities form a significant part of the problem. 
In order to address the stark differences in quality of life and patient outcomes that run along socioeconomic and racial lines, the city has unveiled new population health management goals as part of its Healthy Baltimore 2020 roadmap.
“It is impossible to discuss the health and well-being of Baltimore City’s residents without applying the lens of health equity and systemic disparities,” says the program guide.
“While the overall mortality rate in Baltimore City has declined over the past decade, the City still has a mortality rate 30 percent higher than the rest of the state, and ranks last on key health outcomes compared to other jurisdictions in Maryland.”
Chronic diseases, violence, unhealthy lifestyle choices, and behavioral health problems are significant issues for Baltimore residents.  Obesity rates in Baltimore children are double the state average, and asthma rates are five percent higher than elsewhere in the region.
READ MORE: Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
Approximately ten percent of the city’s population is addicted to drugs or alcohol, and one in every three city-dwelling children experiences or witnesses deadly neighborhood violence, domestic violence, or alcohol and drug addiction in the home.
Eighteen percent of senior citizens live below the poverty line, compared to just 8 percent statewide.
Many of these issues are rooted in historical social and political inequalities that have produced areas of entrenched poverty along with reduced access to economic advancement, healthcare resources, and education.  Race plays a major role in these circumstances, and patient health outcomes are a clear illustration of the difficult problems facing many communities across the nation.
African-Americans make up 62 percent of the city’s population, but 85 percent of those living with HIV/AIDS in the urban area identify as black.
More than ninety percent of homicide victims are black, and more than half are in their 20s when killed.  There is a 20-year difference in life expectancy between Baltimore neighborhoods.
READ MORE: Using Claims, Lab, and Clinical Analytics to Discover Diabetics
“We have heard time again that when it comes to calling out injustice in health, whether in the form of racism, poverty, or historical exclusion, we cannot afford to wait,” wrote Baltimore Commissioner of Health Leana Wen, MD, MSc.
“We must specifically call out the historical policies that have promoted structural racism and injustice. Therefore, our objective must specifically be that we envision a Baltimore in which health disparities are cut by half in the next ten years.”
The Healthy Baltimore 2020 plan lays out a number of ambitious goals for improving population health across racial and socioeconomic lines, but also celebrates its early successes.  The B’More for Healthy Babies program, founded in 2009, has reduced the racial disparity in infant deaths by a full 40 percent, and cut the teen birth rate by a third.
Over the past two years, the city has expanded mental health services into 119 schools, and secured a $1.5 million grant for preventing community youth violence.
“We have taken the epidemic of substance abuse head-on, launching one of the most aggressive opioid overdose prevention programs in the country,” she continued. “Last year, we trained more than 7,000 people in using the opioid antidote, naloxone; worked with the Police Department to train officers (with over a dozen lives saved by police); and became the first jurisdiction in Maryland to issue blanket prescriptions for naloxone for all 620,000 residents.”
READ MORE: Dental Care is the Missing Piece of Population Health Management
The city has also received a $22 million grant to improve HIV prevention and treatment, which is targeted at the African-American community, and hopes to end AIDS in the region by 2030.
More ambitious population health improvement goals are on the horizon.  Behavioral health, chronic disease management and prevention, violence prevention, and the delivery of better core community services will be improved through data-driven efforts aimed at breaking down the fundamental issues that affect vulnerable populations.
Specific goals include reducing racial disparities in overdose deaths, unmet medical needs, rates of vision care, lead poisoning and lead exposure, infant mortality and teen pregnancy, and child fatalities.  The city will also try to close the gap between black and white residents who live in a food desert, and eliminate differences in death rates from cardiovascular disease.
The Baltimore City Health Department (BCHD) will launch city-wide wellness and educational campaigns, including a hospital-based violence prevention program and a telehealth initiative to increase clinical and behavioral health services to schoolchildren.
To combat fatal falls among seniors, the city will develop a patient-centered strategic plan to address health issues for elderly residents, and will also expand its B’More for Healthy Babies home visitation activities.
BCHD will continue to refine its basic plans and disseminate progress reports to stakeholders as the programs develop, the document says.
“We do not want Healthy Baltimore 2020 to be a static strategic plan – a PDF stored on a website,” BCHD wrote. “The purpose of this document is to serve as a jumping off point for conversations across our communities regarding these priorities and what we can all do together to ensure the health of our residents.”
Community conversations and neighborhood events will help to involve residents in the proposed population health management activities, which will focus on creating sustainable, equitable programs for all of the city’s residents.
“We are extremely proud of all that has been done to date, but also know that our work is far from done,” Wen concluded. “In developing Healthy Baltimore 2020, our dedicated staff at BCHD has worked diligently to ensure that the priorities of this strategic plan are informed by all of you – our community partners and citizens of Baltimore.”
“Informed by the community, driven by data, and focused on ‘upstream’ and place-based interventions, Healthy Baltimore 2020 will serve as a guiding framework for ensuring that all Baltimore City residents have the opportunity to be healthy and well.”
Identifying Care Disparities for Population Health Management
How to Get Started with a Population Health Management Program
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementPreventative Care


