NCQA Releases Patient-Centered Medical Home Standards Updates

June 14, 2016

By Sara Heath
June 14, 2016 - The National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) is requesting industry comment on its updates to the patient-centered medical home (PCMH) standards guide for 2017.
In a press release, NCQA describes its updates, saying that these updates will better help key industry stakeholders identify a quality patient-centered medical home.
“The new 2017 PCMH Standards focus on identifying best practices and core activities, signaling that a primary care practice functions as a medical home,” the committee explained. “Additionally, the new standards promote measurement and improvement at the clinician and practice level.”
The updates separate the requirements into six categories which align with pre-existing PCMH requirements. Those categories include team-based care and practice organization, knowing and managing patients, patient-centered access and continuity, care management and support, care coordination and care transitions, and performance measurement and quality improvement.
Dig Deeper
NCQA Revamps Patient-Centered Medical Home to Ease Adoption
Peterson Center Initiative Transforms Delivery of Primary Care
Preventing Big Data Pain Points During a Healthcare Encounter
Within each of those categories, NCQA has also separated requirements into two groups: core recommendations and additional criteria.
The core recommendations include characteristics required for PCMH recognition, such as establishing a designated clinician leader who spearheads the patient-centered medical home charge, and identifying and prioritizing community resources based on social influencers of certain conditions.
The additional criteria include critical PCMH characteristics, but don’t require complete adoption. Instead, patient-centered medical homes may select the recommendations which best suit their patient populations, thus creating a more individualized care approach. The list also includes recommendations marked as “advanced,” completion of which will likely work in a PCMH’s favor.
“Requirements noted as (ADVANCED) are requirements that are more challenging and are above and beyond typical practice function and capabilities,” NCQA explained in its call for public comments. “We anticipate these items will earn practices more credit toward the total recognition.”
Some of the additional criteria includes assessing and coordinating acute care during non-traditional work hours, or monitoring referrals by specialty type.
Advanced criteria includes recommendations like obtaining feedback from a family or patient advisory committee or assessing certain health disparities.
On the whole, these updates include many pre-existing PCMH requirements, and adds new requirements in order to create more patient-centric care models.
By recommending characteristics that help patients better access primary care, or by considering the specific needs of an individual patient population, these new PCMH requirements will help keep pace with the shifting healthcare industry which continuously emphasizes the importance of value-based care.
Further, the patient-centered medical home updates also reduce provider reporting burden and better specifies needed practice structure to enhance operational efficiency.
“Recommended changes reduce documentation requirements whose burden outweighs return, and provide focus on the criteria with the greatest impact on desired outcomes,” NCQA said in its press release.
“They include additional behavioral health integration criteria and introduce requirements for evaluating a practice’s structure, its collaboration with community partners and its integration of social determinants of health for responding to the needs of its patient population.”
Interested commenters must submit their comments by July 15, 2016. NCQA will release the final draft for the patient-centered medical home standards updates in March 2017.
Dig Deeper:
How the Patient-Centered Medical Home “Repackages” Primary Care
Breaking Down the Basics of the Patient-Centered Medical Home
Tagged EHR and Patient EngagementPatient Centered Medical HomePrimary Care Services


