HHS gives $35.7 million to patient-centered medical homes

August 28, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 28, 2014 - Patient-centered medical homes (PCMH) around the country will be receiving a $35.7 million boost from funding provided by the Affordable Care Act, HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell announced this week.  One hundred and forty-seven health centers in forty-four states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico will be able to build, renovate, or alter their facilities in order to promote team-based care.
“Today’s awards will support 21 new construction projects and 126 alteration and renovation projects at health centers across the United States as they work to improve their design and expand existing structures to better support team-based care,” said Mary Wakefield, PhD, RN, Administrator of HHS’ Health Resources and Services Administration.
The grantees include Yakima Valley Farm Workers Clinic, which recently attained Level 3 NCQA PCMH recognition, the highest award available to a medical group.  “One of [Yakima’s] key focuses was developing registries and being able to engage in that population management component,” explained LuAnn Kimker, RN MSN, CPHIMS, PCMH CCE, Director of Clinical Quality Improvement at Arcadia Healthcare Solutions, to HealthITAnalytics in July.  “They were really looking at underserved populations.  They have a lot of patients who aren’t current with some of their screenings, like mammograms and colorectal cancer screenings, so that was a big concern.”
Patient-centered medical homes have been touted as one of the most successful ways to meet the challenges of providing care to an influx of new patients who may not have received routine healthcare while uninsured.  Some studies have found that the PCMH model can reduce costs and slash the number of unnecessary emergency department visits, while others assert that patients who attend PCMH providers receive better screenings and more robust testing services than patients at other organizations.
Dig Deeper
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Applications Close Sept. 15
“Health centers provide access to quality health care for millions of Americans regardless of their ability to pay,” said Secretary Burwell. “We’re making these investments so that health centers will be able to provide even higher quality services to the patients that rely upon them.”  Clinics will receive up to $250,000 each to update healthcare organizations that are increasingly responsible for low-income or newly-ensured patients purchasing coverage through ACA insurance exchanges.
Tagged Accountable CarePatient Centered Medical HomePopulation Health Management


