Case study: PCMH transformation relied on teamwork, technology

July 14, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 14, 2014 - The patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model is emerging as one of the most effective tools for a healthcare organization interested in population health management, accountable care, and process improvements that may ultimately lower costs and increase revenues.  With a focus on ensuring that patients understand their responsibilities, engage in self-management, and feel like their primary care providers is a welcoming hub for accessing the care continuum, the PCMH represents an important goal for organizations seeking a way forward in the murky waters of healthcare reform.
LuAnn Kimker, RN MSN, CPHIMS, PCMH CCE, Director of Clinical Quality Improvement at Arcadia Healthcare Solutions, understands the challenges involved in the PCMH transformation after guiding her client, Yakima Valley Farm Workers Clinic, towards its recent Level 3 NCQA PCMH Recognition, the highest award available to a medical group.  Kimker sat down with HealthITAnalytics to discuss the road towards such an achievement and the impact it had on Yakima as a healthcare provider team.
What were the initial challenges facing Yakima during their transformation?
Yakima Valley Farm Workers Clinic has seventeen health centers spread across Washington and Oregon, fourteen of which do primary care specifically.  We worked with them over an eighteen month period to work on their PCMH transformation.  While they had similar administration and some connectivity, their processes and processes across the organizations were very different and not standardized. They were not an organization that could look at their data from their EHR system, so one of the big challenges there was being able to get baseline data for them to understand the outcomes associated with the care that they were providing.
Most interesting is that Yakima had no particular incentives to achieve Level 3 recognition when they started this process.  Many organizations do this because their payers or someone else in the state is going to incent them to achieve these standards, but Yakima had the foresight to say, “We know this is going to be important for how we manage our patients and we want to stay ahead of that curve and be able to improve our systems overall in how we provide care, because that’ll make us a better organization.”  That attitude facilitated the process, but when we first went in, our goal was to focus on the transformation, not on the financial gains.
READ MORE: Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
How did Yakima focus on population health management?  What technology did they employ?
One of their key focuses developing registries and being able to engage in that population management component.  They were really looking at underserved populations.  They have a lot of patients who aren’t current with some of their screenings, like mammograms and colorectal cancer screenings, so that was a big concern.  They also took a good look at their diabetes care, in terms of recognizing their entire population of patients with diabetes that would be considered within their panel and bringing them in for the appropriate care.
They used their existing EHR to make a very concerted effort to understand where the information needed to be documented.  They spent time to educate providers and staff and really use the care team to be able to help gather that information when appropriate.
That would allow them to report on it and see how they were doing.  It went so far for them because this was really done by a support staff, which they called their Clinical Service Representatives who were working that list to identify the patients and call them or send them letters to bring them in.  Yakima really worked on forming their care teams.  They were able to use their registry to identify patients who were coming in that day that were missing services, and were able to make sure that they targeted those patients when they were in the clinic.
How did Yakima work to engage their staff in the PCMH process?
READ MORE: Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
They developed teams at every level, so there was commitment within the organization all the way from the executive administration to the medical assistants.  When Arcadia went around and did assessments, one of the comments that we heard from their staff was that they were excited to be asked questions about their patients and their care, because historically they had just been given edicts in terms of what they needed to do, and then they were expected to go do it without question.
How can a health system standardize their patient care practices with so many locations?
This process allowed us to determine what needed to be done at the high level, and then roll it out at each of the clinics while allowing them enough flexibility to make it work in their particular clinic.  Each office may not always use the exact same staff person to do it.  They can use the staff person with the right skill set in their clinic to be able to do it.
We were able to monitor when there was variation. Sometimes that variation was healthy, and would be an improvement then that could be shared back across other practices.  Sometimes they were twisting a certain task and doing what was more comfortable for them, but this gave us the chance to say, “Hey, that’s not really the best way to do this particular thing, because we want these other things to happen.  We want to focus on the things that you already consider important for providing care to your patients.  We really just want to help you be able to do that in a more organized fashion.” It was about helping them understand the process better.
What is your advice to other healthcare organizations interested in the PCMH model?
READ MORE: Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
Whether you’re getting incentive payments right now or not, the engagement of your staff and your patients through this process will create benefits for you at multiple levels.  In this particular instance, we monitored not only the care of patients but also the teamwork of the provider.  All of those measures either went up slightly or stayed the same.  So just from that perspective, it’s a huge benefit.
Yakima has patients that have actually said, “I don’t know what you’re doing differently, but something has changed since I’ve been getting my care here, and I like it.” Yakima really sees this as an ongoing process.   From the very beginning, it was about what processes and foundations they need to have in place that will allow them to continually respond to the market environment and changes necessary to meet either quality standards or performance standards at some other level.  If you approach it like that, you’ll almost certainly see some level of return.
Tagged Accountable CareClinical AnalyticsPatient Centered Medical HomePopulation Health Management


