NQF Names Shantanu Agrawal New President and CEO

January 20, 2017

By Thomas Beaton
January 20, 2017 - Former Deputy CMS Administrator Shantanu Agrawal, MD, will take over the reins of the National Quality Forum on January 20, 2017, the NQF announced this week.  Agrawal, who also served as Director of the CMS Center for Program Integrity, will use his policymaking experience in his new role as President and CEO of the NQF.
"Shantanu understands the importance of advancing quality and patient safety both from the frontlines of medicine and from a national policy perspective," said Bruce Siegel, MD, MPH, NQF Board chair and president and CEO of America's Essential Hospitals. "He is the innovative, passionate, focused visionary that NQF needs now to ensure that we respond strategically and effectively to the nation's dynamically changing healthcare landscape."
During his tenure at CMS, Agrawal led the development and implementation of a clinician engagement program intended to improve relations between CMS and physicians during the rollout of MACRA. Agrawal was also instrumental in the creation of CMS programs that are helping to address the nation-wide opioid crisis.
Dig Deeper
CMS Continues Data Transparency Push with Medicare Drug Info
CMS: Patient-Centered Care Strategies Can Combat Opioid Abuse
NQF Proposes Guiding Principles for Health IT Patient Safety
While working the CMS Center for Program Integrity (CPI), Agrawal helped to reduce spending on fraud and abuse, improve federal data transparency, and establish public-private partnerships across the payer industry.  
"Shantanu is an energetic, proven leader with the ideal blend of experience needed to manage NQF's organizational complexities, skillfully navigate our nation's health policy environment, and deliver on NQF's mission to advance quality measurement," said Helen Darling, MA, NQF interim President and CEO. "I care deeply about NQF, its members, and its staff, and am very confident that all will be in excellent hands with Dr. Agrawal."
Agrawal joins the NQF at what he believes is an “exciting and pivotal time.”
"NQF was created 16 years ago by private- and public-sector leaders out of their shared sense of urgency about the impact of healthcare quality on patient outcomes, workforce productivity, and healthcare costs. These issues, and NQF's role to address them, are just as urgent today, if not more so," said Agrawal.
"I look forward to working with our more than 430 member organizations to prioritize and streamline the best measures of quality, ensure that areas in need of good measures have them, and push for the effective, high-value care providers want and patients deserve."
Tagged CMSHealthcare CostsPatient Safety


