Three ways big data is poised to change the face of healthcare

January 06, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 06, 2014 - “Big data” is one of those terms that means everything and nothing to healthcare.  The data gathered by hospitals, physician providers, health information exchanges, and pharmacies can be applied to the big picture of a community, state, or country’s obesity and diabetes problems just as easily as it can help prevent complications during a tiny premature baby’s entrance into the world.
Learning how to apply big data to these issues can be costly and complicated, however.  Healthcare organizations are just starting to gain analytics competencies, and may not know how to chart a course towards data-driven healthcare.  During the month of January, HealthITAnalytics will be taking a closer look at how big data is making an enormous impact on the delivery of healthcare and patient outcomes.
Hospital quality and patient choice
When a patient enters the hospital for an elective or emergency procedure, they always wish to come out again on their way to a full recovery.  Choosing a hospital based on publically reported quality statistics is becoming a routine part of scheduling a surgery or even picking a neighborhood to live.
Big data, gathered from clinical, financial, operational, and performance outcome measures, can help hospitals pinpoint areas of improvement – and allow them to boast to prospective patients about the excellence of their star physicians or top-performing programs.  The development of an analytics infrastructure, starting with EHR adoption and continuing with data warehousing, clinical informatics, and standardized reporting, will bring actionable data to hospitals, allowing them to discover the true potential of big data for identifying opportunities for quality improvement.
READ MORE: Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
Revenue cycle and utilization management
Costs for common procedures are being made public more frequently in an effort to increase transparency, but the correlation between high costs and high quality simply isn’t there.  There isn’t even a correlation between what a hospital charges, what it receives, and what a patient pays, which can make for a frustrating experience for billing departments and bill recipients.
Managing a complex revenue cycle that includes a slew of public and private payers, staffing and resource utilization concerns, federal mandates that include both bonuses and penalties, and a fluctuating patient use cycle that might be heavily reliant on expensive emergency room visits is no easy task.  It’s simply impossible without having the sturdy data collection and reporting infrastructure that’s at the heart of big data.  As hospitals continue to feel the squeeze from accountable care, the Affordable Care Act, and an aging population beset by chronic conditions, big data analytics may be the only lifeline they have left if they want to emerge unscathed from the gathering storm.
“The first thing they’ve got to do is understand the business goals of the organization and try to align data analytics to fall in line with those business goals,” explains Shane Pilcher, Vice President at Stoltenberg Consulting.  “The next step, especially for those developing their data analytics process, is to find some low hanging fruit that they can pursue.  They can use historical data to find areas where they can make a change and, following that change, they can reanalyze and assess to determine what effects it’s had.”
Predictive analytics and population health
READ MORE: Data Mining, Big Data Analytics in Healthcare: What’s the Difference?
After recognizing the need to embrace big data and developing the tools to manipulate patient and financial information, hospitals can finally do something with all that information.  Patients are facing an epidemic of chronic conditions that can be expensive for providers and require significant amounts of coordination between multiple facilities.
Big data holds the potential to turn disparate pieces of information that might not seem clinical in nature into a complex and effective overview of where patients are at risk, where providers are falling short, and where services need to be targeted.  “We know that the financial status of a person impacts their health,” says Alere Analytics CMO Dr. Fauzia Khan.  “Don’t we need to capture that information, too?  If they’re bankrupt or if they’re out of a job, that affects how they’re going to take care of themselves.  We have to have the ability to analyze that information and the capacity to respond to it.  None of that exists today.  We’re just barely coming to the understanding that we have to pay attention.”
Population health management is the proactive piece of big data that might be able to save millions of dollars for the ailing healthcare system.  Researchers and clinicians have everything from the seasonal flu to diabetes to hospital acquired infections in their sights as they harness the overwhelming tsunami of available information, turning EHR data into risk scores and provider best practices into simple tools like video discharge instructions and checklists for care transition planning.
None of these insights would be possible without a laser focus on the ability of big data to revolutionize the way patients receive care.  The healthcare industry is remaking itself through information technology and health data management, a transformation that simply wouldn’t be possible without a solid foundation of very big data.  By developing the tools and strategies necessary to tie together financial, clinical, and socioeconomic information, providers have the potential to better themselves and the populations they serve.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataClinical AnalyticsFinancial AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data AnalyticsHospital QualityQuality Of Care


