Walgreens, CHE Trinity enter coordinated care agreement

May 23, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 23, 2014 - Walgreens drugstores and CHE Trinity Health, an 80-hospital health system in Illinois, have entered into a coordinated care agreement that will help to further Walgreens’ presence as a healthcare provider in addition to a pharmacy giant.
“This collaboration is based on our organizations’ mutual commitment to serve people at every intersection of their health and wellness needs,” said Scott Nordlund, Executive Vice President of Growth, Strategy and Innovation, CHE Trinity Health. “Transformative ideas for improving care are central to our mission at CHE Trinity Health, so we are pleased to join with Walgreens to introduce new and better strategies for health and wellness throughout our communities.”
“Coordinated care programs are vitally important to help ensure patients have access to the quality, convenient, affordable care they need before, during and after a hospital admission,” added Alan E. London, Walgreens vice president of strategic clinical partners. “Working with an integrated health system such as CHE Trinity Health offers an ideal opportunity to further leverage Walgreens health care assets to coordinate patient care across multiple regions of the country. We look forward to working together to help patients in these communities get, stay and live well.”
Walgreens has made a concerted effort to increase its footprint in the healthcare world, opening hundreds of retail clinics with EHRs and advanced analytics to become an adjunct to a patients’ primary care provider.  The partnership with CHE Trinity, which has operations in 20 states across the nation, will “provide a menu of opportunities for each of our local ministries to consider and they will determine which are the most appropriate for their market,” CHE Trinity spokeswoman Carol Tingwall said. “These will be local decisions made in local markets.”
Dig Deeper
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
“Walgreens rightfully sees itself as an innovator in the space, and they want to have an advanced capability to achieve maximum value and impact for the members who look to them as part of their care continuum,” says Keith Dunleavy, MD, President and CEO of analytics giant Inovalon, which recently announced a partnership with Walgreens and its Healthcare Clinic system.  “By putting analytics into their centers, we get to be part of an integrated care system, together with the insurance companies and Walgreens, and with the member, to stay in good communication with the member’s provider.”
The agreement will allow CHE Trinity and Walgreens providers to exchange health information like medication lists to provide more coordinated services for patients, as well as improving patient education, population health management services, and general preventative care.
  Tagged Care CoordinationPatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


