Big Data Analytics Spurs Development of Personalized Medicine

January 29, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 29, 2015 - Personalized medicine, or “precision medicine” as President Obama called it in his State of the Union address earlier in January, is finally coming into its own with the rapid growth of big data analytics, genomic sequencing, and support from research and healthcare organizations.  As discovering individualized risks for certain conditions and diseases becomes cheaper and easier, and scientists collect huge databanks of DNA to provide a deep, rich playground for researchers to make unprecedented findings about heredity, disease paths, and effective treatments, healthcare is moving into an era of discovery that makes big data analytics a necessity instead of a futuristic daydream.
More than twenty percent of the novel drugs approved by the FDA in 2014 were related to personalized medicine, states the Personalized Medicine Coalition (PMC) in a new report.  These treatments target or reference a specific biomarker that predicts the effectiveness or a treatment or helps providers make focused decisions about a course of care.
“We have gone from one or two targeted drugs approved each year to a significant amount in 2014,” said Daryl Pritchard, PhD, Vice President of Science Policy at PMC. “It is clear that personalized medicine is increasingly becoming an integral part of clinical care, and we expect this trend to continue along with greater recognition of the value of personalized medicine by payers and providers.”
Academic institutions have been working on gathering the enormous volume of data necessary for precision medicine long before the term ever made it onto the national stage, but the presidential attention given to the topic has created quite a stir in the scientific community.
“I want the country that eliminated polio and mapped the human genome to lead a new era of medicine – one that delivers the right treatment at the right time. In some patients with cystic fibrosis, this approach has reversed a disease once thought unstoppable,” President Obama said in his annual address. “Tonight, I’m launching a new Precision Medicine Initiative to bring us closer to curing diseases like cancer and diabetes – and to give all of us access to the personalized information we need to keep ourselves and our families healthier.”
READ MORE: All of Us Precision Medicine Network Expands with $13.8M in Grants
While the White House is expected to give more details about the initiative soon, some scientists close to the project are speculating that the first real step towards a nationwide infrastructure to support personalized medicine would be the establishment of a DNA databank larger than any other currently available.  CNBC reports that a number of pharmaceutical executives have received invitations to the White House on Friday, when the scope of the initiative is slated to be revealed, signaling the importance of multi-stakeholder collaboration in such an ambitious mission.
As these pharmaceutical companies seek to leverage this new platform to find profit in developing treatments that take into account very specific parameters for use, the FDA is trying to strike the right balance between regulation and encouragement.  The number of personalized drugs approved by the agency may be increasing, but personalized medicine is still a wilderness that needs to be carefully explored.
At the Personalized Medicine World Conference this week, FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg expressed caution when describing the role she hopes the Agency will take during this time of discovery.  “As we explore the opportunities for more targeted therapies … the hub of personalized medicine is getting the target right,” she said. “It’s one thing to have one diagnostic for one disease in the old world, but in the modern era that can’t be the framework that we use. We’re very much immersed in thinking about how to optimize FDA regulatory oversight of next-generation sequencing.”
“With whole-genome sequencing, the number of genetic variants is just enormous,” Hamburg added.  “Literally numbering in the millions. We cannot possibly be thinking about having clinical validation of every possible association with those variants, but we have to have a science-based approach that enables us to provide physicians and patients with information that they can really act on.”
The FDA will be holding a public meeting in February to discuss its role in the governance of laboratory-developed tests (LDTs) that help guide providers towards the correct treatments for patients with unique needs.  The Agency’s oversight of such diagnostics has been a matter of debate in the industry, but Hamburg maintains that someone much ensure the safety and effectiveness of testing in the same way as treatment.
READ MORE: FDA Holds App-a-Thon for Precision Medicine, Next-Gen Genomics
“We want patients to be able to get an accurate diagnosis and get the treatments that they need,” she said. “We certainly don’t want an inaccurate diagnostic that might result in inappropriate treatment or lack of treatment when treatment might be indicated.”
Whether handled on the federal level or taken on by academic and private institutions, big data analytics with a focus on personalized genomics is a new frontier for an old problem: finding medicines that work.  As data exchange proliferates and more powerful analytics become increasingly capable of crunching the petabytes of information necessary to produce accurate results, the healthcare system will be faced with myriad new opportunities to provide highly effective treatments for some of the most intractable diseases rooted deeply in a patient’s unique genetic makeup.
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient Data


