Real-time CDI Can Help Clinical Analytics As Well As ICD-10

February 12, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 12, 2014 - In any business that relies on the fast-paced, fine-tuned workings of many different skill sets, there are always opportunities for improvement.  From retail shops to banks to technology firms, analytics are helping to pinpoint weak spots in the complex gears to improve the customer experience, boost revenues, and raise efficiency levels.  In healthcare, the ‘customer experience’ is often a matter of life and death, which puts a great deal of pressure on clinicians in charge of creating documentation that ensures accurate treatment and a quick discharge.
As of October 1, 2014, ICD-10 will become the major supplier of this pressure to create quality clinical documentation that includes enough detail and specificity not only to help select the right code, but also to serve as a rich data source for analytics.  To help providers pay attention to their documentation habits and improve their workflow, many organizations are turning to clinical documentation improvement (CDI) software integrated into their EHRs.
These programs help reduce the need for coders or quality improvement specialists to come back to a physician after the fact and ask for more detail, a circumstance that frequently gets awkward for both sides of the equation.  In a recent survey from Nuance, 83% of physicians expressed their irritation with the process, which they called “very disruptive” and a significant time suck.
“These tools will provide real-time immediate feedback to providers after it automatically reviews their notes, and provide queries to help them make appropriate clarifications where needed,” explains Dr. Reid Conant of Conant and Associates, a practicing emergency department physician at Tri-City Medical Center in California. “The information is right upfront when they’re still in that patient’s chart.  The care and the detail are all fresh in the provider’s mind as opposed to hearing back from the coder two or three days later, or even weeks later when they have forgotten all of this.  Then the chart is under coded or not appropriately coded, and that hurts the whole organization as well as the provider individually.”
Integrating CDI into the point-of-care workflow can also help reinforce habits that might not be so easy to teach when a resentful physician is being lectured about her lack of attention to detail.  The survey shows that 71% of physicians would like to have information delivered to them immediately and would respond better to a flashing light in their EHR than an after-the-fact query.
“Your average physician may not take the time to educate themselves on the exponentially increased level of detail necessary for ICD-10 documentation and compliance,” Conant told HealthITAnalytics.  “And so, these tools will help streamline that process for them.  Not only will real-time feedback will allow them to create more accurate documents for any given patient, but they’ll be much more likely to change their behavior patterns to a more appropriate level.”
With better all-around documentation, organizations will be positioning themselves for more than just ICD-10 success.  Clinical analytics is only as powerful as the data that drives it, and the more detail laid out in the EHR, the better the end result.  CDI can also help close lingering gaps caused by hybrid paper-EHR workflows, Conant adds.  When providers are used to creating a complete record in the EHR, extraneous scribbles on notepads will dwindle.
“Clinical documentation will be improved not just in quality, but in time of delivery,” he said.  “When we see organizations move to full electronic documentation, they get rid of the hybrid record.  They get rid of paper notes that are only available on the paper chart at the patient’s bedside, and it allows providers to communicate more effectively.  So there will be secondary benefits even beyond the revenue benefits for the organization and provider.  That’s something that’s exciting from a clinical perspective.”
“I think that we’ve been able to limp along on paper processes, on delayed feedback loops between coder and provider,” Conant said.  “Experienced coders have been able to connect the dots many times or make assumptions.  But with the level of detail required with ICD-10, and expanded additional regulatory requirements, we will no longer be able to depend on broken processes and we’ll need to leverage technology.  Come October 1st, there is no question that all our processes will be improved.  There is no question our overall compliance will be far greater than it is today.”
  Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceData CaptureEHR UseHealth Information ManagementICD-10


