Patient engagement, HIE pose challenges for population health

October 15, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 15, 2014 - Population health management is supposed to operate on a relatively large scale: it’s the process of providing interventions to groups of patients who meet certain criteria.  But those interventions also have to function on the individual level if they are to drive behavioral change and effectively improve health for each and every patient, which is why patient engagement is such a key piece of the population health puzzle.
Health information exchange (HIE) and personal health records are supposed to make the population health management process easier by providing a complete record of a patient’s journey through the care continuum.  However, multiple sources of data don’t always harmonize as well as the healthcare industry could like, making population health more difficult than it appears on the surface.
At Banner Health, a 25-hospital health system based in Arizona, Senior Director of HIMS Operations Christine Steigerwald is working to bring disparate patient data sources together in order to provide more comprehensive care to patients across multiple states.  Stiegerwald sat down with HealthITAnalytics during the 2014 AHIMA Convention in San Diego to discuss how myriad data streams make population health management a challenge.
What are some of the challenges you faced while improving patient engagement levels ahead of Stage 2 meaningful use?
We were fortunate that we were allowed to hire about twelve health information management (HIM) professionals to make rounds to the patients in their rooms and show them how to log into and navigate the portal.  That’s been very successful in helping us meet the Meaningful Use initiative right now.
READ MORE: Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
Some patients are hard to persuade, so we got very creative with bringing them into a small office, offering them the opportunity to get a $10.00 gas card if they would spend the time with us.  We’ve actually set a target of 10 percent or more rather than just trying to get to five percent.
We have two areas in Phoenix where we’ve got a high Medicare population, so we have had a little bit of a struggle there.  We have some patients thinking that they were violating HIPAA rules by even getting into their own records, or they thought that by doing accessing the portal, they were actually allowing CMS to get their information.  So we have really worked on consumer awareness and education, and we stress how to maintain and how to manipulate their own information and why that’s so important.
Is it difficult to get elderly or non-computer literate people to engage with their health data?
I don’t think there’s as big of a gap as people make it out to be, but we have certainly run into some issues with the elderly population.  One of our last resorts in the small, rural areas is actually sending a person to people’s homes with a laptop.
We saw the same resistance with EHRs and physicians.  We’ve had a lot of physicians that retired rather than have to learn the EHR.  They just did not feel that they could do that.  It’s definitely something we have to pay special attention to.
READ MORE: Artificial Intelligence a “Low Priority” for Healthcare Orgs in 2018
How do multiple sources of patient data affect population health management?
We’re struggling right now with population health, honestly, from a data governance point of view.  We have different systems feeding what we have now as a population health system, and there’s a lot of discussion about who has access. Are people documenting in that system?  If they are, how does that change our official medical records policies?  When you have an accountable health organization and you have a system out there with all this information coming in, are you going to have people putting information into that?  So where does your medical record go?
Just defining what an official medical record is going to be isn’t as easy as it sounds.  Everybody used to think it’s the file folder on the shelf, and now it’s not just the EHR anymore.  It’s all the systems feeding the EMR and all the systems then that you feed out.  You’ve got all these patient portals from the hospitals to the doctor’s offices to diagnostic imaging places, labs, and you have people going to multiple places to get their information.
And then you have the health information exchange.  Banner Health has facilities in several different states.  We’ve got our state health information exchange in Arizona.  We’re connected in California.  We have the Colorado HIE, and now the Nevada HIE is going to go live.
How does being part of a number of health information exchanges make it difficult to ensure a smooth flow of patient data?
READ MORE: IoT, Analytics, HIM Push Healthcare IT VC Market Past $5B
Colorado and Arizona are opt-out states.  Nevada is the opposite.  So, here we have developed all of our internal processes for health information exchange based on two states, and then we have a third state where there are going to be different work flows, different policies and procedures.  And then you have vendors now who are building health information exchanges that are going to compete with the state and regional organizations.
We have minor patients, of course, ages 12 to 18.  In most of our states, you’re only a minor until you’re 18. In Nebraska, the age is 19.  So we have to put a different process in place over there.  Well, the portal can only handle one role right now.  And that’s just a good example, again, of standardizing federal laws, state laws so everybody’s on the same page. At some point we have pick one way to do this.  Let’s do this one way.
One of the things we’re trying to do at Banner is to change the “patient portal” into a “member portal.”  We define a member as a patient, a provider, a payer, so that everybody goes to one place to get information.  So as a patient all your information is there.  Your provider goes there to get that information.  We need to get data to be more global.
That’s how the banking business got there, for example.  They standardized it.  They defined everything.  We haven’t done that.  The whole benefit of going electronic was supposed to be the ability to standardize the language everybody was talking, but that didn’t happen.  We need to make it happen so we can really accomplish what we’re setting out to do.
Tagged Health Information ManagementPatient EngagementPopulation Health Management


