Patients who review physicians generally give high ratings

June 04, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 04, 2014 - Is there actually some good news to be found on the internet?  According to Vanguard Communications, which surveyed more than 46,000 online physician ratings on popular review sites, not everyone who logs on to give their opinion is a pitiless troll.  Patients who rate their experiences with physicians and the quality of their care are overwhelmingly generous with their praise, the study found, giving 56.8% of physicians a four-star rating or higher.  Just 12% of physicians average less than two stars on sites like Google+ and Yelp, with patients in California, Hawaii, and Wisconsin delivering the highest patient satisfaction scores in the nation.
Internet rankings are forming an increasingly important part of the provider selection process for choosy patients as higher out-of-pocket costs force consumers to pay close attention to the value they are receiving for their money.  A recent JAMA study found that nearly 20% of patients think it’s very important to be able to find reviews and other online information about their physicians, with 37% of patients avoiding a physician due to poor ratings from fellow consumers.
But physicians don’t have as much to worry about as they might fear.  “From our findings, it appears that doctors tend to get much better reviews than hotels, restaurants and retail businesses,” said Vanguard CEO Ron Harman King. “While some doctors indisputably suffer from unjust online comments, our snapshot of American healthcare providers indicates doctors in general enjoy widespread respect and gratitude from patients.”
Increasing patient satisfaction and improving the overall patient experience is more than just a marketing ploy for many hospitals and physician offices.  With heated competition between health systems for market share and an emphasis on quality putting big bucks on the line for providers moving to accountable care reimbursement models, how the patient views their treatment is just as important as the actual outcome of their illnesses.  A 2013 survey from the Medical Group Management Association (MGMA) found that better performing hospitals used patient satisfaction surveys more often, and healthcare providers are starting to pay attention to what their clients think.
Dig Deeper
How Big Data Analytics Can Improve Patient Utilization Rates
Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
Clinical Decision Support App May Cut CTs for Head Injuries
After the University of Utah Health Care system decided to make its patient satisfaction surveys public, they experienced an enormous spike in web traffic and a lively discussion from consumers about the quality of their experiences.  “The majority of our patients are very generous with their comments, clearly articulating the value we provide,” said Thomas Miller, MD, Chief Medical Officer at UUHC.  “Most physician review sites have fewer than a dozen reviews, but it’s clear patients and consumers making health care decisions want online access to trusted reviews from their peers.”
Tagged Healthcare Business IntelligenceHospital QualityPatient Satisfaction


