Precision Medicine, Big Data Crowdsourcing Bring IT Innovation

December 14, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 14, 2015 - Crowdsourcing is nothing new for charities and creative projects across a number of different industries, but it may have special importance for healthcare’s journey into big data analytics and precision medicine. 
Gathering large patient cohorts isn’t easy for researchers attempting to address chronic diseases, and innovative technologies that find a meaningful place in the marketplace are often difficult to develop without concerted effort from hundreds – or thousands – of eager developers.  
The challenges are many, but healthcare accelerators, research collaborations, patient advocacy groups, and professional societies aren’t letting the power of the crowd slip through their fingers. 
From cardiovascular disease to cancer to colitis, start-ups and studies are making real progress on a number of fronts thanks to the growth and maturity of big data analytics tools.
MATTER adds twenty new innovators to its community
READ MORE: Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
With support from the American Medical Association (AMA), the Chicago-based MATTER community has added a score of new partners to its innovation ecosystem.  The new members will take advantage of the collaborative workspace in the AMA Interaction Studio, as well as the mentorship and educational opportunities MATTER provides to work on a number of pressing healthcare concerns.
“It is incredibly valuable for healthcare entrepreneurs to have access to physicians as they build their products, technologies and businesses," said MATTER CEO Steven Collens in November when announcing the launch of the AMA Interaction Studio. "The AMA Interaction Studio enables entrepreneurs and clinicians to collaborate with each other in a real-world, technology enabled environment to accelerate the development of meaningful new solutions to improve health and healthcare.”
Health data interoperability, workflow enhancements, precision medicine, machine learning, chronic disease management, electronic prescribing, and patient engagement are among the issues that the twenty new companies are hoping to tackle.
Booz Allen Hamilton and Kaggle launch second annual Data Science Bowl
Heart disease is the target of this 90-day research competition, which asks participants to develop diagnosis algorithms based on MRI images supplied by the National Institutes of Health (NIH). 
READ MORE: Six Pediatric Hospitals Create Personalized Medicine Coalition
With a $125,000 top prize for the team that delivers the most accurate analytics to identify the key indicators of cardiovascular disease, the competition hopes to deliver real-world solutions to the critical clinical task of identifying heart problems as early as possible.
“This competition will empower data scientists from across the world to improve both the ability to diagnose and the capacity to care for those with heart disease, enabling people to live longer, healthier lives,” said Booz Allen Hamilton President and Chief Executive Officer Horacio Rozanski. “Booz Allen is proud to be a leader in pursuing data science for social good. This project has great potential to demonstrate how data scientists solve problems that affect millions of people each and every day.”
“Combining our rich data set with the collective power of data scientists presents a truly unique opportunity to redefine heart health research in just three months – an almost unbelievably short period of time in this industry,” added Dr. Michael S. Hansen, a NIH specialist in fast MRI techniques for real-time imaging and interventional procedures.
The winning algorithm will be released in an open-source format at the end of the competition, allowing cardiologists and other researchers to leverage the results in their own work on precision medicine treatments for cardiovascular disease.
“This competition demonstrates advanced analytics’ ability to amplify the impact of the individual analyst, and real-time cardiac measurement promises to significantly improve care where it matters most: at the doctor-patient level,” Hansen said.
READ MORE: Precision Medicine Aids 20% Drop in Pediatric Cancer Deaths
Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America creates 40,000-strong patient registry for IBD
Patients with irritable bowel disease may soon benefit from insights generated by IBD Plexus, a new big data analytics initiative from the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America (CCFA).  With the intention of becoming the biggest IBD patient registry in the world, the system intends to integrate multiple sources of data, including EHR information, into a comprehensive resource for research into bowel diseases.
"As the leader in IBD research, CCFA is truly the only organization that can undertake this type of initiative," said CCFA's Chief Scientific Officer Caren Heller, MD, MBA. "Rather than having multiple, fragmented research efforts and registries, IBD Plexus is providing access to data across study cohorts from a single point. IBD Plexus utilizes technology that enables its stakeholders to capture, organize and link large amounts of data on individuals with IBD, and to mine and share this data for insights into the causes of and potential treatments for IBD."
Supported by more than $17.5 million in funding from The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust, the project requires sophisticated data management, big data analytics, biobanking, and interoperability capabilities.  More than 40,000 patients recruited from existing CCFA initiatives will provide the foundational cohort for the registry.
"We have made tremendous progress very quickly," said Dr. James Lewis, professor of medicine and clinical epidemiology at the University of Pennsylvania and Chief Scientist for IBD Plexus. "We engaged key stakeholders early in the process through participation in IBD Plexus committees and workgroups. The continued support and excitement from our collaborators reinforces that IBD Plexus is the platform that is going to lead us to better treatments and eventually, cures."
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation Health Management


