In Medicare, Mental Health Disparities Impact Ethnic Minorities

December 15, 2017

By Jessica Kent
December 15, 2017 - Multiracial and other minority Medicare beneficiaries generally reported worse mental health functioning and more symptoms of depression compared to white individuals, according to a CMS data highlight from the Medicare Health Outcomes Survey (HOS).
The data, collected between 2014 and 2016, also showed that individuals identifying as “multiethnic” were among the most likely to report poor mental health and the most likely to be unable to participate in daily activities due to their mental health concerns.  
Mental health plays an important role in overall wellness. CMS notes that mental illness is associated with higher healthcare costs and morbidity, and is often underdiagnosed and undertreated in older adults.  
Dig Deeper
Why Mental Healthcare is Key to Population Health Management
Mental Health Care Disparities Impact Population Health
Mental Health, Primary Care Integration Cuts Depression Scores
Depression is particularly prevalent in older populations, and minority groups tend to experience the condition more often than their white counterparts.
Hispanic beneficiaries reported extremely high frequencies of depression, with Puerto Ricans reporting the highest rate at 40.9 percent. In all other Hispanic groups, reports ranged from 30.8 (Other Hispanic) to 34.5 percent (Cuban).
American Indian (AI) and Alaskan Native (AN) Medicare beneficiaries reported depression 9 percent more than white beneficiaries, the data brief found. Other Pacific Islander groups reported depression 14.4 percent more than White beneficiaries.
CMS also found that AI/AN respondents missed an average of 3.8 more days of activities due to poor physical and mental health than white respondents. Samoan and Other Pacific Islander beneficiaries reported missing an average of 4.0 more days of activities than white respondents.
Multiethnic respondents reported the most days missed of any group surveyed at 11.6 days.
Source: CMS
Other key findings from the CMS data highlight include:
13.5 percent more AI/AN beneficiaries reported positive depression screenings than white beneficiaries
Multiethnic beneficiaries reported the greatest percentage of positive depression screenings out of any group, at 31.1 percent
Although Asians reported a lower percentage of positive depression screenings on average, responses varied greatly among Asian groups
AI/AN, Black, most NHOPI groups, and multiracial beneficiaries had significantly worse Mental Component Scores (MCS) than White and Asian beneficiaries
Non-Hispanic beneficiaries had significantly better MCS scores (51.8) than multiethnic beneficiaries (44.8)
The US Census Bureau estimates that non-white racial and ethnic groups will comprise 56 percent of the total population by 2060.
By 2050, 39 percent of those 65 and older is projected to be non-white.
These estimates show that the country’s minority groups will soon become the majority, which heightens the importance of addressing the racial and ethnic health disparities described in the CMS report.
CMS states that in 2013, the HOS became the first large scale survey to gather data using expanded race and ethnicity categories.
Deficiencies in racial and ethnic data occur frequently within Medicare, Medicaid, and commercial plans, which can worsen disparities in healthcare.
A patient’s socioeconomic status and social determinants of health are also significant factors when it comes to healthcare disparities. Patients who don’t have access to secure housing, who have limited English language proficiency, or who don’t have access to transportation all have an increased chance of falling into the healthcare gap.
The statistics detailed in the CMS report can be discouraging, but some initiatives have been launched that may help the problem: for instance, a recent partnership between Walgreens and Mental Health America allowed patients to use an online platform and complete screenings for mental illness.
Such initiatives serve both older and ethnically and racially diverse patients who may have mental health concerns. Patients can choose to seek help if a condition is detected, and it might benefit some to have access to more innovative modes of healthcare delivery.
If all Medicare beneficiaries are to receive the same quality of care, disparities between racial and ethnic groups must be recognized. Understanding how to best collect data from these groups and learning the best practices to treat them will hopefully lead to improved overall health. 
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementMedicareMental HealthPopulation Health Management


