3 Key Steps to Achieve Scalable Population Health Management

June 01, 2016

By Sara Heath
June 01, 2016 - A thriving and scalable population health management strategy relies on patient risk stratification, care coordination, and data-driven approaches to care, says the recent PwC report, Population Health: Scaling Up.
According to the report, population health management strategies have so far been successful, but haven’t been implemented at large scale across the country. If they continue to expand across more healthcare facilities, the authors predict, the nation could see notable cost reductions.
By overhauling population health management strategies, healthcare organizations can begin that scaling-up process, helping to bring patient-centered and cost-efficient care to more individuals.  
Here are the three key steps to take in order to establish a population health program that will stand up to the stress of expansion.
Smartphone Owners Five Times More Likely to Use Patient Portals
Depression screenings for diabetics improve self-management
Precision Medicine Must Be a “Team Effort,” White House Says
Borrowed from Retail, Anthem’s Big Data Analytics Boost Member Engagement
176M May Be Covered by Accountable Care Organizations by 2020
Senate Passes SGR Repeal, Embraces Value-Based Reimbursement
Do Data Transparency, Open Payments Reduce Clinical Research?
WY population health program cuts ER visits, readmissions
TGen Launches Discovery Platform to Boost Genomic Data Analysis
Epic Systems Wins Best Overall Health IT Suite in KLAS Rankings
Small providers can achieve engagement through patient portals
New Epic Systems EHR, Big Data Features Zero In on Interoperability
Microsoft Revs Up Healthcare Artificial Intelligence Projects
HIMSS Health IT Score Gauges Value of EHR, Big Data Adoption
Aetna Grant Helps PA Expand Opioid Data Analytics Dashboard
UCLA Research Center to Focus on Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Johns Hopkins, UCSF, Stanford to join FDA innovation center
CMS to Require Health Information Exchange for Long-Term Care
NIH, Pharma Orgs Launch $215M Precision Medicine, Cancer Project
FDA Uses Genomics, Big Data Analytics to Track Food Poisoning
Partnership Ups Medication Adherence with Predictive Analytics
Care Coordination Hampered by Inadequate Discharge Summaries
Do you need a data warehouse for good healthcare analytics?
Health Information Management Pros Need Security, EHR Data Skills
Machine Learning Complicates FDA Clinical Decision Support Guidance
Trial uses real-time clinical analytics to study cancer drug
EHR Alerts Increase HPV Vaccine Rates Ten Times Over
Patient privacy, data security concerns plague analytics
ONC: Don’t Let HIPAA Errors Hinder Population Health Management
What Does the Stage 3 Meaningful Use Rule Mean for Analytics?
Are Big Data, Genomics, Precision Medicine the Cure for Cancer?
Real World Evidence, Big Data Can Speed Clinical Innovation
Preventable Diabetes Care Costs Total $16 Billion Per Year
Can the ONC, EHR Vendors Fix Healthcare Data Interoperability?
Precision Medicine Study Highlights Role of Machine Learning
EHR Predictive Analytics Flag 32% of Nursing Home Patient Falls
Administrative Support Atop Barriers to Nursing Informatics
ONC Details Plan to Improve Data Standards, Big Data Analytics
PCMH Care Coordination Program Cuts Hospital Readmissions
Epic Systems Leads in Hospital EHR, Business Intelligence Adoption
Healthcare Informatics System Aids Research Collaboration
Patient Adherence, Evidence-Based Care Top Priority for Docs
HSPC Interoperability Project Tackles HIE with FHIR, App Culture
Quality care relies on clinical, administrative cooperation
PCORI will speed analytics with $93.5M in research funding
EHRs Can Aid Chronic Disease Management in Urban Settings
Financial analytics present RCM opportunities for hospitals
Communities Tackle Opioid Abuse with EHRs, Population Health
Primary Care Access Aids Diabetes Chronic Disease Management
Epic Systems EHR Brings Care Coordination to Walgreens Retail Clinics
65% of Patients Unlikely to Volunteer for Clinical Research
Healthcare Big Data Success Starts with the Right Questions
CMS Unveils Interoperability, EHR Clinical Documentation Changes
EHR Data Mining, Patient Outreach Can Aid Hypertension Care
Over 80% of Nurses See Increased Role in Patient Management
Social Determinants of Health Dashboard Expands to 500 Cities
Synchronized Pick-Up Boosts Medication Adherence Up to 13%
Patient-Generated Health Data, mHealth Can Improve Outcomes
UMass to Study Use of Wearables in Chronic Disease Management
ICD-10 Prep Raises Data Quality for Revenue, Population Health
ICD-10 National Pilot highlights data quality issues
ONC Exploring Use of Blockchain in EHRs, Healthcare IoT Devices
Is healthcare ready to get SMAC-ed around?
Machine Learning, EHR Big Data Analytics Predict Sepsis
Medicare Diabetes Prevention Program Model Expands Nationwide
To build a population health management program, start anywhere
Boston Children’s using genetics to predict best medications
Docs return to bad antibiotic habits when monitoring ends
HIMSS14: Population health, clinical analytics are the future
Precision Medicine, Genomics Require Strong Data Governance
NIH Opens Up “All of Us” to Research Participants Nationwide
Groups Urge $34.1B NIH Budget for Precision Medicine, Research
Healthcare Internet of Things Investment is Just Getting Started
How to Use Healthcare Big Data Analytics for Accountable Care
FDA Holds App-a-Thon for Precision Medicine, Next-Gen Genomics
Humana Expands Population Health Management, Accountable Care
Big Data, Interoperability Top Black Book’s Trends for 2017
Will the IoT Bring a Patient Engagement, Interoperability Revolution?
Why do docs think mHealth is useless for patient monitoring?
CMS Unveils Value-Based Patient-Centered Primary Care Model
Clinical Analytics Adoption Lags behind Accountable Care
Population Health, Clinical Analytics Drive New Job Categories
Study: Automated readmissions review not yet sensitive enough
Mayo Clinic, VC investors bring analytics to the bedside
Blockchain Offers to Solve Pain Points in Healthcare Data Management
Growing NLP Marketplace Drives Healthcare Machine Learning
Google Using FHIR, Deep Learning for Healthcare Predictive Analytics
Internet of Things, Precision Medicine, NLP Drive Market Growth
Focus on Precision Medicine Treatments Grows in Hospitals
Is Blockchain the Answer to Healthcare’s Big Data Problems?
Four Population Health Management Steps for Safety Net Patients
Brown Gets $1.1M to Study Medicare Post-Discharge Care Quality
Genetic research, data analytics face privacy, ethics concerns
CMS Reform Model Fosters Care Coordination, Population Health
Texas HIE adds genetic data for analytics, personalized care
Cerner buys Siemens to boost population health, RCM assets
Opioid Prescriptions Dropped 12% in 2017 as Guidelines Change
Mass. AG to Expand Prescription Drug Monitoring Database
CMS Publishes Medicare Payment Info to Promote Data Transparency
1304 Health Centers Share $100M in Quality Improvement Funds
Stratifying patients based on risk
Risk stratification, or organizing patients based on the severity of their conditions and their level of service utilization, is the foundation of population health management. . This will help determine whether the patient is the right fit for a specific program.
“Identifying the patients who are the right fit for our programs is the biggest challenge, but also the biggest opportunity,” said Jessica Dudley, chief medical officer for Brigham and Women’s Physicians Organization.
Grouping patients based on their risk level, as well as on their clinical and medical data recorded in the EHR, could also help to target treatments to improve patients’ overall wellness in the most effective and efficient manner available.
Driving care coordination through networks
The PwC report also emphasizes the fact that health systems need not approach population health management alone. By coordinating patient care across different stakeholders within a network, health systems can ensure overall wellness activities for their patients are being handled on all fronts.
Relying heavily on care coordination across network players also helps health systems identify new care approaches they can incorporate into population health management.
“One mistake organizations often make is designing population health programs based solely on existing capabilities,” the report says. “While playing to their strengths in specific services, they should build their programs around the specific needs of their target populations and partner where they have gaps.”
This can go beyond coordinating care between primary care physicians and large acute care hospitals. Health systems should coordinate with community groups and different technologies to help them identify environmental or lifestyle risk factors that could exacerbate a patient’s chronic illness.
“To scale effectively, organizations should build an ecosystem of care that extends into the community – and into the home – by developing strong service-level agreements with partners that can fill their service gaps and extend their reach to patients.”
The glue that holds much of this care coordination together is a strong effort for robust patient engagement. If health systems cannot engage their patients, their efforts in caring for overall patient wellness may be moot.
Understanding how patients respond to care options, such as  those offered in retail clinics helps health systems know how to partner and coordinate with those sorts of care sites.
Utilizing data-driven strategies
Finally, the PwC report says, health systems must use big data analytics to determine how to direct patient care resources and services. Examining EHR data for certain health trends helps providers better identify care approaches.
However, these kinds of data-driven strategies are under-utilized, PwC says, and too few healthcare professionals are sharing health data with their partners.
Furthermore, several health systems fall into the trap of “data dumping,” or collecting and holding too much data without an effective plan to utilize the information for specific and immediate use cases.
“Population health programs should prioritize data efforts and focus on providing information to clinicians and their partners in manageable bites,” the report states.
Once health systems incorporate these practices into their population health management strategies they must continue to reevaluate their programs, ensuring that the right patients are in the right place to achieve the best possible outcome.
“Organizations should build care services around patient cohorts and actively monitor health outcomes,” the report concludes. “They should regularly reevaluate whether patients assigned to each group still belong there. Staff productivity should improve by actively managing patients between cohorts and levels of care.”
Dig Deeper:
Do Provider Apply Population Health Management Inconsistently?
Could Blockchain Control Population Health Management Costs?
Tagged Care CoordinationHealthcare Big Data AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


