AMGA Launches Chronic Disease Management Goals for Diabetes

March 16, 2016

By Jacqueline LaPointe
March 16, 2016 - The American Medical Group Association (AMGA) Foundation recently launched the Diabetes: Together 2 Goal campaign, an initiative to improve chronic disease management for Type 2 diabetes in the United States.
The program is a three-year national campaign created by the AMGA Foundation to improve care by 2019 for the millions of people affected by diabetes. It consists of over 100 medical groups, non-profits, health systems, and corporations, including the American Diabetes Association, American Association of Diabetes Educators, Novo Nordisk, Inc., and Geisinger Health.
Participating organizations customize a program to improve how healthcare providers treat Type 2 diabetes, such as A1C measurement and control, blood pressure management and control, prescription of statin, practice-based screening, and medical attention to nephropathy.
This is the second campaign in the Chronic Care Challenge series. The first initiative was Measure Up/Pressure Down, which brought together 150 AGMA members to improve blood pressure detection and control for Americans.
Dig Deeper
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Epic Systems Integrates Geisinger Population Health Toolkit
Top 10 Challenges of Population Health Management
“We are proud to launch our second campaign and build upon the hard work that our members are doing to address the nation’s most pressing chronic conditions,” said Donald W. Fisher, PhD, CAE, President and Chief Executive Officer of AMGA and Secretary of the Board of AMGA Foundation.
“We strongly believe that over the next three years and with the dedication and commitment of some of the largest and most prestigious health care systems in the country, we will see improved care among people with Type 2 diabetes and set them on a better path to live longer, healthier lives.”
The AMGA Foundation is a nonprofit branch of the AMGA. It supports evidence-based and value-based research. The foundation creates educational programs to help a myriad of healthcare actors to improve best practices in population health management.
Each initiative for AMGA Foundation uses one or more of the 11 campaign planks, which are evidence-based processes aimed at improving patient empowerment, care delivery, and information technology. Participants report data quarterly to AGMA to determine progress with the campaign.
Participants can empower patients by developing an accountable care team, integrating behavorial and emotional support into treatment, and referring patients to self-management education programs.
To improve care delivery, the initiative suggests conducting practice-based screening, adopting treatment algorithm, measuring HbA1C every 3 to 6 months, assessing risk of cardiovascular issues, and maintaining contact with patients who are not reaching their goals.
The program encourages participants to leverage information technology by using a patient registry, embedding point-of-care tools, and publishing transparent internal reports.
Together 2 Goal hopes to create more patient-centered and comprehensive care for Type 2 diabetes patients. The campaign is an integral part of a larger goal to manage chronic diseases using value-based and patient-centered treatments. It also aims to reduce medical expenses by using population health strategies.
“We’re pleased to be a part of this significant program, as physicians are on the front lines of helping patients with this serious disease,” said Todd Hobbs, MD, Chief Medical Officer, Novo Nordisk US, and participating member of Together 2 Goal.. “Being a part of this AMGA Foundation initiative is important for us, as we know firsthand how devastating diabetes can be and how challenging it is to manage.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


