53% of Patients Say They Cannot Access Their EHR Data Online

December 23, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 23, 2015 - Despite the widespread adoption of electronic health records and a nationwide push to engage patients through online portals, fifty-three percent of patients participating in a new HealthMine poll do not have online access to all their EHR data, and sixty percent aren’t even sure if their health data is being stored somewhere in an EHR. 
More than thirty percent of the 502 respondents to the poll stated that they have had some level of difficulty accessing their medical records.  This includes trouble with accessing medical records (32 percent), biometric information (31 percent), lab results and insurance data (29 percent), and prescription details (25 percent).
The survey highlights a persistent disconnect between the desire of patients to view their EHR data online and the lackluster ability of providers to deliver the service to their consumer base.
"We should be long beyond the days where one doctor holds the chart and we don't get to see it – but we're not,” said Bryce Williams, President and CEO of HealthMine.
The success of data sharing and transparency initiatives like OpenNotes and Blue Button appear to provide ample evidence that two-way collaborations between patients and providers can improve satisfaction and engagement on both sides of the equation. 
A pilot program of the OpenNotes initiative, for example, left 80 percent of patients feeling more in control of their care after viewing unfiltered documents created by their providers, and motivated 70 percent of participants to improve their adherence to care plans. 
Backers of the program recently announced a $10 million expansion of the capability, which will bring open EHR data access to an estimated 50 million patients nationwide.
“OpenNotes will make clinicians’ thinking far more transparent, and that holds both complex and exciting implications for patients, for their family members, and for the host of health providers who care for them. This is particularly true for vulnerable populations, and patients with a large burden of chronic illness, including mental illness,” said Tom Delbanco, MD, co-founder of OpenNotes, a primary care doctor at BIDMC and a Professor of General Medicine and Primary Care at Harvard Medical School.
“Opening the doctor’s black box breaks down traditional barriers and provides a foundation for all kinds of exciting innovations in health care, changes that in my view will benefit the vast majority of patients and their clinicians,” he added.
Providers appear to be generally on board with the idea that patients should be empowered to view their health information, point out potential mistakes, and take responsibility for making better choices based on what they read.  None of the physicians taking part in the initial OpenNotes pilots said that they would prefer not to let their patients view their information.
Data transparency and patient engagement are fundamental building blocks for effective population health management and chronic disease care, both of which are becoming increasingly financially impactful as value-based reimbursements stress better outcomes for patients with ongoing needs.
But technology challenges and educational barriers often make it difficult for even the most well-meaning provider to offer robust, intuitive, and comprehensive EHR data access to their patients.  While Stage 2 meaningful use initially championed the adoption of online patient portals, providers struggled so greatly with meeting the 5 percent patient engagement threshold that CMS scrapped the requirement.
“Providers and system developers have noted…an overall immaturity in the market with health IT equipped with the functions required to support the transmission of health information by a patient or the delivery of a secure message from a patient to a third party,” acknowledged CMS in its April 2015 proposal to retool the patient engagement measure.
Even when providers do have a patient portal package in place, clinicians have faced difficulty informing and educating their patients about their options.  In 2014, a Xerox survey found that more than a third of patients simply did not know that they had the ability to view their data online, mostly because their providers never told them.
“Physicians just aren’t having that dialogue,” Tamara St. Claire, Chief Innovation Officer of Commercial Healthcare for Xerox said to HealthITAnalytics.com at the time.  “When we look at some of the best practices out there, we see that having that conversation multiple times along the patient’s path through the office is most effective.”
“And we think having that conversation directly with their physician is going to be most important.  People really want to hear it from their physician, because they’re that trusted source.  Even as medicine is changing, having that talk with the physician is probably going to have the most impact.”
As patients take more financial responsibility for their healthcare choices, the ability to understand their personal needs and the opinions of their providers will become increasingly critical for their decision-making processes.  The HealthMine survey found that 74 percent of patients believe that EHR data access would improve their knowledge of their own health and foster better communication with their providers.
"Sitting in the driver's seat of health requires transparency of health data,” Williams said. “Consumers must be able to see the road, the potholes, the landmarks. Having access to complete health information is essential to managing health and healthcare dollars—and every consumer should have it."
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR Patient DataPatient EngagementPopulation Health Management


