Healthcare analytics checklist: What you need to get started

November 25, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 25, 2013 - While EHR adopters have the benefit of meaningful use to guide their efforts, organizations interested in moving beyond data capture to data analytics have a harder time finding a roadmap to help them along the way.  One of the biggest obstacles is that every organization has a distinct set of goals and their very own challenges, complicated by financial constraints, competing priorities, a lack of technological maturity, and differing amounts of enthusiasm from the top of the food chain to work with.  So where do you start?  Here is a basic guide to some of the key elements of building an analytics program that will cut costs, improve patient care, and lead to smarter decision making.
A vision of the future
If EHRs have taught us one thing, it’s that planning ahead when implementing any IT system is critical.  As the new generation of EHRs focus more on standards and interoperability, emerging analytics vendors have had a chance to build their products to national specifications with long-term goals in mind.  But healthcare organizations can’t just rely on their vendors to have it all figured out.  Hospitals need a clear list of business goals they wish to accomplish with the data they are collecting now – and the data they will be collecting in the future.
“Organizations can’t simply be implementing for today or what they think they might need in the next year,” warns Shane Pilcher, VP at Stoltenberg Consulting.  “It’s a false sense of security that they have time.  Big data in healthcare can be compared to looking in your side view mirror. The little warning that objects may be closer than they appear is quite fitting – big data is much closer than most organizations think.”
The right team
READ MORE: Adult Vaccine Project Produces Population Health Best Practices
Whether your goal is to save money by identifying and reducing operating waste or to target segments of the patient population to improve chronic disease management and lower unnecessary readmissions, you need the right people on your side.  Clinical informaticists, quality improvement coordinators, health information managers, data scientists, and a strong IT team will be the foundation for all your future work.  Informatics experts with a background in clinical practice can help transform your hospital into an organization that values data as a business asset while bridging the gap between wary clinicians and project architects with different ideas of what is important.
The right technology
Not every hospital can afford to build their own complex data warehouse or house their own Watson in the basement, but that doesn’t mean they can’t use what they have to dig deeper into the data than ever before.  EHR vendors are increasingly offering add-on analytics suites to interface with existing systems, and that HIM department you just built is filled with experts on how to squeeze valuable insights from financial and clinical data that you already collect.
You can start with revamping your master patient index or focus on overhauling data integrity efforts as we approach ICD-10.  Consider joining a local or state HIE or ACO that is putting a focus on analytics as part of the services it offers, which reduces the need for in-house infrastructure while providing access to a wider pool of data for deeper insights.
A vision of service
READ MORE: Artificial Intelligence Helps with Costs, Clinical Care at HIMSS18
It’s true that many hospitals initially move into analytics in order to save money for themselves.  They need to be able to keep the doors open, after all.  But why?  To better serve the patients that come to them.  The ultimate focus of analytics is identifying the causes of illness, the obstacles patients face when they are getting well, and the best way to keep the healthy population even healthier so that hospitals, payers, and consumers alike can keep costs low.
Without this outwardly-focused vision of accountable care, and the results it can bring to patients, hospitals will have a difficult time convincing stakeholders that the initial expense of implementing systems and onboarding qualified data specialists is worth it.  The elevation of quality care through population health management is increasingly tied to financial reimbursements, which brings the necessity for strong data analytics full circle.
“Improving population health presents a major cultural, operational, and financial shift across a broad range of stakeholders,” asserts a report by the Patient Centered Primary Care Collaborative (PCPCC).  “While our current system is designed to respond to the acute needs of individual patients, it must transition to one that anticipates and shapes patterns of care for populations. By tracking meaningful patient information, the care team can improve the effectiveness of interventions both for individuals and for entire populations.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBest PracticesClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


