Georgia, Alabama Make Health Information Exchange Connection

October 14, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 14, 2015 - The healthcare industry’s attention may be shifting towards EHR-based health data interoperability, but state health information exchanges are not slackening their pace of progress as they continue to play a major role in the nation’s health IT communication strategy.  The Georgia Health Information Network (GaHIN) and Alabama’s One Health Record are the latest state-level projects to announce the start of successful interstate health information exchange.
"Healthcare doesn't stop at the state line, so we need to ensure that physicians in both Georgia and Alabama have real-time access to patient health information at the point of care," said Denise Hines, executive director of GaHIN. "Having medical history and pertinent patient information from the neighboring states can help improve care quality and save time by providing critical information at the point of care during non-urgent and emergency situations."
"By connecting with GaHIN, we help advance the health of the citizens of Alabama and Georgia by putting more complete patient information in healthcare providers' hands," added Alabama’s One Health Record Director Paul Brannan. "Ultimately, we will also be able to reduce unnecessary healthcare costs, increase administrative efficiencies and improve health outcomes."
While many regional HIEs continue to struggle with financial sustainability woes, and many providers are hesitant to make HIE infrastructure investments during a time of significant flux in the health IT marketplace, GaHIN is among a handful of state-level HIEs that are continuing to make measurable progress despite the environment of uncertainty.
Dig Deeper
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
New Epic Systems EHR, Big Data Features Zero In on Interoperability
CT Medical Society Announces New Health Information Exchange
In April of 2014, the network secured a big membership boost by adding the Georgia Department of Public Health, the state Medicaid program, Grady Health System, and Emory Health System to its list of partners.  The move allows providers at Grady and Emory Health Systems to access data held by the Medicaid program, as well as immunization records managed by the Department of Public health.
In November, GaHIN continued its development by making its first interstate connection with South Carolina’s Health Information Exchange (SCHIEx), which allows the two organizations to share critical care coordination data such as patient histories, lab tests, medication lists, allergies, and physician notes.
“With GaHIN’s connectivity to the SCHIEx network comes the ability to seamlessly share medical information immediately and securely across state lines – ultimately paving the way for additional state-to-state connections across the country,” Hines said at the time. “This expanded connectivity allows for the delivery of the right health information to the right place at the right time – no matter where the patient is receiving care – across secure, robust inter- and intrastate networks.”
The organization has also worked with the Georgia Partnership for TeleHealth to increase telemedicine and remote care services for children in rural schools.
One Health Record has focused on fostering connections between the state’s public health and insurance agencies and several state hospital groups.  Its governmental partners include the Alabama Medicaid Agency, Departments of Public Health, Mental Health, and Senior Services, as well as the University of South Alabama, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alabama, and a number of professional associations representing hospitals, medical professionals, primary care, and pediatrics.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureCare CoordinationHealth Information Exchange


