California providers team up for analytics, clinical trials

January 31, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 31, 2014 - Providers and pharmaceutical researchers at major academic institutions and medical centers are coming together to share the costs and quicken the pace of medical research.  As part of the Partnership to Accelerate Clinical Trials (PACT), a dozen California organizations will use an analytics tool to identify patients who may qualify for trials while sharing the costs for research and administrative work.
The project currently includes five University of California campuses, as well as Children’s Hospital Oakland, Dignity Health, Sutter Health, and Stanford University, reports the San Francisco Business Times.  Dr. Clay Johnson, Associate Vice Chancellor of Research at UC San Francisco, initiated the idea in order to streamline the process of helping drug developers start and pursue clinical trials. “It’s already California-wide and will go beyond that,” Ryan said. “We want to set an example as the Bay Area being where brilliant collaborative ideas start and spread.”
Instead of forming an agreement with each individual trial site and shuttling paperwork through a cumbersome bureaucratic system before research work can even begin, PACT would help create a centralized institutional review board that will ensure sites are pre-qualified to participate.  The partnership also hopes to flag potential patient participants using EHR data and an analytics tool in order to provide a wider pool of applicants to trials that could help save lives.
On average, a drug currently takes more than a decade from inception to prescription, and can cost up to $4 billion to develop.  By using EHR data and advanced analytics, programs like PACT and efforts from other researchers at Stanford University hope to slash the time and costs involved.  “We are cutting down the decade or more and the $1 billion it can typically take to translate a laboratory finding into a successful drug treatment to about one to two years and spending about $100,000,” said Atul Butte, MD, PhD, associate professor of pediatrics, explaining how big data and genetic profiling helped a little-used group of antidepressants turn into a promising avenue for combating deadly small-cell lung cancers.
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
By centralizing the administrative structure of clinical trials and using an enormous pool of EHR data to pick out patients, PACT hopes to achieve similarly positive results.  The project may even provide an example for the National Institutes of Health, which funds more than $35 billion in medical research a year.
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig DataClinical AnalyticsClinical DataClinical IntelligenceMedical ResearchPatient Data


