Patient-Generated Health Data, mHealth Can Improve Outcomes

January 20, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 20, 2015 - Patient-generated health data, and the ability of healthcare providers to accept, view, exchange, and use such data to make better treatment decisions, are some of the most crucial pieces of a coordinated and effective care team, write Michael A. Wittie, MPH, and Simone Myrie in a blog post for HealthIT Buzz.   Patients with complex and long-term needs can better engage with their care if they can rely on a health IT infrastructure that is interoperable, open to communication, and proactive, adds Donna Cryer, a health IT advocate whose liver transplant and subsequent healthcare needs highlight the importance of care coordination across multiple care settings.
“Data rests at the heart of health IT’s capacity to help improve care quality and health outcomes: standards-based, interoperable electronic systems make it possible to access, share, use and re-use information that was once locked in paper charts kept by individual providers,” write Wittie and Myrie. “As more and more consumers engage and adopt mobile health technologies to help them better track their daily health and wellbeing, it will be increasingly important to consider how those data can flow seamlessly from consumers to providers – and back – to help everyone achieve better health.”
The authors hold up Cryer as an example of how patient-generated health data (PGHD) and tenacious patient engagement has helped her manage her ongoing needs, despite several geographical relocations and the necessity of juggling half a dozen specialists or more in different practices and settings.  Ensuring that her personal health information was complete and portable was a key factor in navigating these challenges, the post adds.
“All my physicians need to be able to communicate with each other and with me about my care, and to share my complete medical record. Interacting with these physicians generates data from dozens of visits, images, lab tests, and procedure reports that need to be reviewed, evaluated, and acted on in a timely fashion,” Cryer explains. “Widespread use of a truly interoperable electronic health record system with real-time alerts and analytics as well as a patient portal designed with patients and for patients would increase the likelihood that troubling trends can be addressed before they become serious illnesses and expensive hospital stays.”
With the help of wearable mHealth devices and the PGHD that they can produce, Cryer can help her providers manage her care on a daily basis by giving them the data they need to judge any changes in her status or the impact of treatments.  “Using these tools – a wireless scale and bracelet-style activity tracker – my doctors and I have been able to assess intervention effectiveness, adjust dosages, unearth side effects, and clarify decision points,” she says.
READ MORE: What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Wearable devices may still be a novelty for many patients, but their impact is becoming increasingly important as consumers demand more in the way of convenience, coordination, and an evidence-based approach to treating all of their concerns.  A recent survey from PricewaterhouseCooper found that 40 percent of physicians currently monitor patient-generated health data from wearable devices, while 85 percent of those clinicians find it at least somewhat useful for patient care and clinical decision-making.
“There is clearly awareness and an interest in the market about the whole phenomena of using data for health,” Monique Levy, Vice President of Research for Manhattan Research, part the Decision Resources Group, said to HealthITAnalyticsin November.  “The issue is around really meaningful data.  The idea of being aware and tracking your basic vitals has been around for a while.  But consumers are more interested in this idea that it will help improve outcomes.”
Bringing mHealth and wearable devices to scale in a truly effective way has been an ongoing challenge for the healthcare industry.  EHRs are not always designed to accept large amounts of patient-generated health data, and must be retooled to present the information in a comprehensible snapshot for busy physicians.
“Management of patient data is a core expertise that’s flourishing in many domains,” said Levy. “It will be more of a pervasive science, but I think the discipline around creating rules for how this happens is quite complex.  You’re going to have to have many different stakeholders involved in the process.”
For patients like Cryer, whose active lifestyle began to take its toll on her knees, a wearable fitness tracker helped her and her physician to be conservative when considering treatment options, she said.  After receiving a cortisone injection, she relied on her fitness tracker to help her figure out her next steps.
READ MORE: Chronic Care Management Improves Pediatric Outcomes by 20%
“Two weeks after the injection, I was able to use my activity tracker to see that my number of steps tripled from 3,000 steps per day to 9, 000 steps per day, showing that it had had a clear beneficial effect,” she says. “Based on this success, my doctor and I decided that we would consider options for the next intervention when my average number of steps fell below 4,000 steps again.”
“Without the objective measure provided by my activity tracker, we would be basing our decision on my subjective assessments of getting worse and my knee being as bad as it was before. By putting my data to work for me, we can now do better.”
Tagged Care CoordinationPatient DataPatient Engagement


