Maine HIE moves into analytics to add value for providers

October 21, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 21, 2013 - Health information exchanges haven’t always had it easy.  While HIE is critical to the larger goal of interoperable, interconnected, exchangeable data as the foundation of a climate of communication among providers, the reality is that HIE isn’t always easy to do.  Citing little interest, poor coordination, and a lack of financial sustainability, many HIEs have shut down before ever going live, let alone collecting and analyzing patient data.
The State of Maine, however, has seen great success with HealthInfoNet.  After a recent announcement that all acute care hospitals in the state are connected or under contract, HealthInfoNet CEO Dev Culver sat down with HealthITAnalytics and Eric Widen of HBI Solutions, Inc., to discuss how the two organizations have been working together to bring analytics capabilities to Maine’s providers, adding value to the service and providing an important new tool for population health management to the mix.
To read the second part of this interview, please click here.
What led you to start thinking about data analytics as part of your HIE?
Dev: For us, expanding the role of the exchange to begin to support our clients with data that we have is a very logical evolution.  At the end of the day, the database is the true asset for the exchange, while the act of exchanging data for treatment is very important, it’s the database that truly is the real asset.  So moving towards analytics is a natural progression for an exchange, because it’s adding value to those clients.
READ MORE: Cleveland Clinic, IBM Watson Partner for Population Health
For us, we’ve been evaluating strategies for how we actually begin to leverage the data into the aggregated form so it could be used to support situations like looking for what’s going to happen to a patient or looking at patterns and trends in populations.  I think for any HIE, that needs to be central to their strategic plan.  We’re the only agent in the State of Maine that sees that patient moving across points of service in the community.  That combined picture becomes incredibly valuable in terms of trying to optimize care delivery and the coordination of care.
Eric: HealthInfoNet has information going back at least four years on around 1.1 million patients.  They have really rich data, and we’re starting to see great results around predictive risk modeling, which includes risk stratifying patient populations for future high-cost events.  Specifically, we can predict with high accuracy which patients are likely to show up in the inpatient arena, and which patients are going to show up in the ED in the future.
This tees up targeted care intervention management in the hospitals, which we’re actively working on.  We also do predictive modeling on 30-day readmissions.  We identify patients upon discharge who are highly likely to come back within 30 days to avoid the penalties.
How have you designed and built your analytics infrastructure?
Dev: Basically what we’ve done is stood up the data warehouse itself, and that’s an important accomplishment in its own right.  What’s fascinating about the data warehouse is that it’s now refreshing the data on a weekly basis.  The analytics are no older than a week, which is really quite unusual when you think about most of the predictive analytics are based on claims.  Many of those claims-based systems are at best 60 days old, sometimes older.  So the analytics we’re providing are at oldest a week old.  Our target by the end of this year is to get it down so it’s current within a day.  So that has some major implications when you’re looking at things like who’s going to show up in the emergency room.
READ MORE: AHA Debuts Cloud-Based Cardiac Precision Medicine Data Platform
What we then do is set up a set of “cubes”, or views of the database that are pre-defined to make it easier for folks to get at answers.  There’s a data quality cube, for example, that allows us to look across all of our sources of data to see where we have issues with the data.  That’s important because we’re trying to use the data very differently than we use it in the exchange itself.
Then we have views that look at market share and volume, so a provider can go take a look by diagnosis or by originating location of a patient, where their activity is being generated, or who is doing certain types of work in the state.   We also have the predictive and quality modules.  Now we’ve started to look at variance so a provider can actually see where costs are being generated, whether it’s in lab usage or radiology uses.
What’s next for HealthInfoNet?
What we haven’t done yet is combine the two databases, but we’re starting to.  So we have the clinical database and we have started now to take in from some of our initial demonstration partners, we’re taking their 837 claims database.  So now we can match claims and clinical, and we’re working on bringing those two together.
Right now we have four institutions that are serving as initial evaluators of what we’re doing.  They have access into the views that sit on top of the data warehouse.  Care managers are starting to say, “If I can predict who is going to be admitted six months out, what can I do with that information in terms of interceding with that patient?  Am I seeing more, and am I finding a more significant population than I’m able to do on my own?”
READ MORE: ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
With that, we also get terrific ideas back from these folks, and suggestions about how to present the data or places where we may have overlooked opportunities.  It’s really a matter of working in partnership with HBI and with these four organizations to evaluate opportunities to further expand.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureApplied AnalyticsBig Data AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceData StorageHIE AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


