AHIMA information governance framework fosters data analytics

October 09, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 09, 2014 - A strong information governance infrastructure is the foundation for intelligent, actionable data analytics, AHIMA leaders said at the 2014 Convention in San Diego last week, urging healthcare providers and health information management (HIM) professionals to adopt the core principles of AHIMA’s newly published guidelines.  With a set of eight core areas for healthcare organizations to master, the guidelines include tips and methods to ensure that all healthcare data meets high standards of compliance, availability, integrity, and accountability.
“We certainly have rolled out our information governance platform here at the Convention, and we are encouraging professionals to go back and take a look at their organizations to make sure that they have information governance practices and principles in place,” Angela Kennedy, AHIMA President 2013-2014, said to HealthITAnalytics.  “Information governance is not a program. It’s a practice that must be applied in order for organizations to really address the changing payer models that are occurring across the healthcare ecosystem. It’s really important that we have clean data that can address issues not only of quality, but also of cost. If we have that, and we put those principles in place, it’ll really be a catalyst to help organizations make the most of their assets.”
In a press release last week, AHIMA summarized the eight key points of information governance as follows:
Accountability: An accountable member of senior leadership shall oversee the IG program and delegate responsibility for information management to appropriate individuals.
Dig Deeper
HIM Pros Must Shift from Coding to Health Informatics, Analytics
CMS Begins the Search for a Chief Health Informatics Officer
AHIMA: Focus on Healthcare Big Data Analytics, Informatics in 2018
Transparency: An organization’s processes and activities relating to IG shall be documented in an open and verifiable manner.
Integrity: An IG program shall be constructed so the information generated by, managed for, and provided to the organization has a reasonable and suitable guarantee of authenticity and reliability.
Protection: An IG program must ensure that the appropriate levels of protection from breach, corruption and loss are provided for information that is private, confidential, secret, classified, essential to business continuity, or otherwise requires protection.
Compliance: An IG program shall be constructed to comply with applicable laws, regulations, standards and organizational policies.
Availability: An organization shall maintain information in a manner that ensures timely, accurate, and efficient retrieval.
Retention: An organization shall maintain its information for an appropriate time, taking into account its legal, regulatory, fiscal, operational, risk and historical requirements.
Disposition: An organization shall provide secure and appropriate disposition for information no longer required to be maintained by applicable laws and the organization’s policies.
“While the growing volume of information is certainly an information integrity challenge, there are far greater challenge to ensuring trust and integrity that IG will address These include the current state of interoperability and lack of rules and standards for documenting in the electronic environment,” said AHIMA EVP/Operations and Chief Operating Officer Deborah Green, MBA, RHIA, in the statement. “Challenges such as these make adherence to an IG program crucial to information use and exchange. Adopting these principles will serve the best interest of patients, providers, insurers, public health officials and policymakers.”
“We’ve done such a great job laying out our strategic foundation, and now we just need to do it,” added Cassi Birnbaum, President Elect during an interview at the Convention. “For those members who don’t feel like they have the tools or the confidence – sometimes it’s just a matter of confidence – we’re here. That’s my message. We’re here to support you and provide mentorship.”
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Informatics


