Cancer Moonshot Flags Basic Big Data Woes of Precision Medicine

July 21, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 21, 2016 - The Precision Medicine Initiative and the Cancer Moonshot may be generating enormous cross-industry enthusiasm, but the research community must address some of its most foundational systemic problems if it is going to successfully cure cancer, says Greg Simon, Executive Director of the Cancer Moonshot Task Force.
In a webinar presented by FasterCures this week, Simon outlined several big data access and management challenges that face researchers as they strive to develop personalized treatments for the broad variety of diseases that are collectively known as cancer.
“You have to admire the fact that Richard Nixon started the war on cancer in the 1970s when we had no army, we had no weapons, we had no genome, and we had so little ability to deal with cancer, but he wanted to put it on the national psyche,” Simon said.
“Forty-five years later, we have an enormous army of people, we have incredibly precise tools, and we have a real opportunity to change the world around cancer.  The way the President has organized this is designed to engage the entire country in the work of achieving a decade’s worth of progress in 5 years.”
Despite the new array of technologies now available to researchers, and the evolution of the health system’s understanding of the origins, development, and treatment of cancer, Simon believes that persistent cultural issues are holding back the industry’s ability to meet its ambitious precision medicine goals.
READ MORE: NIH to Bring Precision Medicine Data Collection to Patient Homes
“The way we’re organized has been the same for decades,” he pointed out.
“Grants take almost a year to get, so people plan for projects that take a year to do.  Researchers don’t get their first grants until they’re well into their late 30s or early 40s, so it’s hard to recruit young people into the field.”
“In medicine, oftentimes the raw data is locked up for a year or more because it’s held by journals that require expensive subscriptions or ‘hog’ access to the raw data for a long period of time, which is actually fairly unique in the sciences.”
While other segments of the scientific community, such as astrophysics or geology, tend to coalesce around a few institutions that provide shared specialized equipment for researchers, the decentralized nature of medical research has allowed the development of data siloes and communication barriers that lead to repeated efforts and the inability to share ideas.
“So the first problem we have is how we can change the culture,” Simon said.  “How do we share data better?  How do we redesign clinical trials to recruit more patients more quickly?  How do we standardize medical nomenclature and the way we gather tissue or biorepositories?  How do we create large databases of genomic information that give any researcher the opportunity to find new patterns in cancer?  And how do we take advantage of resources most of us didn’t even know existed?”
READ MORE: AMA, Patient Groups Join “All of Us” Precision Medicine Outreach
Simon noted that the Department of Veterans Affairs, for example, has built to one of the newest and most advanced genomic sequencing laboratories in the world at Walter Reed Hospital, where clinicians can perform surgery on a tumor and send the tissue for sequencing in just thirty minutes.
Thanks to a two-year collaboration with IBM Watson Health, which donated its supercomputing power to the VA for cancer diagnostics, the tumor can be analyzed and compared “to all existing medical literature and pick out the two or three treatment options that are most commonly recommended in the expansive literature that no one doctor could ever possibly digest,” said Simon.
“This means that the tumor board can start on third base and doesn’t have to start at bat,” he added.  “This will save weeks, and in some cases months, for treatment options.”
Public and private organizations are working on similar breakthroughs across the nation.  Dozens came together at the Cancer Moonshot Summit at the end of June to share their ideas, announce new collaborations, and lend their support to addressing personalized medicine for cancer with the urgency it deserves.
“People have huge motivation to be involved, and we’re hoping that we can pull them all together,” said Simon.  “But there are some system changes that can only happen at the government level.”
READ MORE: “All of Us” Precision Medicine Program Enters Beta Testing
The Cancer Moonshot is working alongside the National Institutes of Health and the National Cancer Institute to shorten the time it takes to apportion grant funding to promising research projects, and to lower the barriers for younger researchers looking to devote their professional lives to cancer research.
The NIH and NCI also hope to become technology hubs for researchers, Simon continued, so that investigators can have access to collaborative research environments complete with cutting-edge tools.
“We want to bring people in and train them how to use these [technologies], like cryomicroscopes that use freezing rather than crystallization to stop the electrons and ions in a protein so you can study structure,” he said.
The Cancer Moonshot is the brainchild of the Obama Administration, but Simon hopes that the political turnover in 2017 will not be the end of the concerted industry effort to improve cancer care and quality of life for patients.
“There are so many things we can be doing that we need to start doing now,” he said.  “This is July.  The Obama Administration is over in January.  But we are convinced that the Moonshot will continue one way or another.”
“We have no way of knowing what will happen in the next administration, but we do know that there is an enormous private and public sector interest in continuing this work.  Part of what we will do before the end of the year is put tougher a roadmap of what has begun under this administration that needs to continue with regard to culture change and programmatic change, and how the next administration can build on the work we’re doing.”
Strong bipartisan support, as well as collaboration between the public, private, for-profit, and non-profit sectors of the industry, bodes well for continued progress no matter what the future political climate, he concluded. 
“There’s such strong interest at every level in fighting back against cancer,” he said, including among patients, caregivers, and everyday Americans who understand the critical nature of their contributions.
“This is not a spectator sport,” Simon said.  “This is one Moonshot where everybody gets to be an astronaut and everybody is on the rocket.  Everyone can make a difference.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsGenomicsMedical ResearchPrecision MedicinePrecision Medicine Initiative


