Indiana-Purdue gets $2M for population health, efficient care

December 04, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 04, 2013 - Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis has received a $2 million grant from the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute to support the work of a team from the School of Informatics and Computing intending to research how patients flow through the healthcare system in order to identify opportunities to streamline care.  Led by Brad Doebbeling, Chair of the Department of BioHealth Informatics, researchers will seek ways to involve patients in the process of expediting and improving access to medical care.
“We were funded to form a collaborative of community health centers from around the state of Indiana to gain a better understanding of how we can improve access to health care in Indiana,” Doebbeling said.  The grant follows a similar award from the National Network of Public Health Institutes to fellow professor Brian Dixon, who will be exploring ways to use EHR data and advanced analytics to measure population health on a block-by-block level within a community.
“When there is a limited budget for, say, preventing diabetes, the county health department has to determine how to spend its resources,” Dixon said. “One choice is to evenly divide the money across all communities within the county, some of which probably don’t have as much need as others. A second choice is to identify specific areas within the county that might need intervention the most.  We’re not sure how small you can go until you have no confidence in what the data are telling you.”
“We’re right at the tipping point in health care informatics and health system redesign, where we can effectively use the information and data to make better decisions about organization and to provide more efficient, higher-quality health care,” Doebbeling said. “I’m excited; now is the time to solve those kind of problems. Our country is embarking on a grand experiment to work within existing insurance plans and delivery systems to expand care to the uninsured.”
Dig Deeper
What Does “Pick Your Own Pace” MACRA Mean for Data Analytics?
Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
Doebbeling will track patients as they enter into clinic systems and examine the ways patients, providers, and other staff can get involved in the discussion surrounding more efficient care and improved access for low-income and uninsured patients.  Providers are increasingly focusing on such population health management techniques as research continues to show the importance of reaching patients in the community and providing preventative health services to preclude costly and dangerous major crises.
“There is tremendous data and information available that we need to utilize to provide better, safer and more efficient and effective health care,” Doebbeling added.  “This is exciting because it’s a real partnership between patients, providers, staff, health systems and researchers all working together to solve problems with access to care.”
Tagged Accountable CareMedical ResearchPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


