Standardizing data for analytics will be a challenge for HIEs

October 22, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 22, 2013 - One of the major problems plaguing nearly all of the health IT initiatives underway at the moment is a lack of standardization, and health information exchanges (HIE) are little different.  Though the majority of state designated entities are just on the cusp of entering their teenage years, so much has changed in the last decade that no one could have envisioned what will be required of these organizations in the years to come.  As data-driven healthcare becomes a reality, HIEs will need to put a great deal of effort into standardizing the vast amount of information available to them, say Dev Culver, CEO of Maine’s HealthInfoNet, and Eric Widen, President of HBI Solutions, Inc., in order to leverage data for population health management and predictive analytics.
To read the first part of this interview, please click here.
What do other HIEs need to do in order to leverage their data through analytics?
Dev: If you listen to the HIE community right now, there’s a general consensus that analytics is a significant component of sustainability.  You have to do it.  I think it comes down to two things: how deeply are you penetrated already, and how much data do you have to work with?  The second is how well standardized the data is.
Eric: A lot of HIEs across the country do look towards Maine for advice because of their maturity.  Through conversations with them, a lot of them are exploring the same concepts.  But because they’re not as mature from a data standpoint, there’s more legwork to do to get the data to the point where it can be put into an analytics platform.  It’s more upfront infrastructure work to make that happen.  But from a conceptual roadmap, most of them are thinking along the lines of analytics.
READ MORE: Lack of Talent, Direction Afflict Healthcare Data Analytics Plans
Dev: One of the key design decisions that HealthInfoNet made in 2005 was that we would map the clinical data the best we could to international taxonomy standards, like LOINC, ICD-9, and CPT, so that the data can become comparable across different organizations.
That’s so fundamental to what we’re doing here, and I think it’ll be a real challenge to many other HIEs that are just starting to develop a data set, but now want to create a comparative picture of data.  They will struggle.  Because the basic building blocks they’re working with are probably not very standardized.  Most HIEs did not undertake that as part of their initial design.  So that’s a major challenge.
But assuming that you can standardize the data, it doesn’t really matter if you’re a centralized data repository model or a federated model, as long as you can get to the data.  The real challenge, quite frankly, is whether or not you have the capability to standardize the data.
How will ICD-10 affect your analytics work?
Dev: We absolutely look forward to taking that data in.  We’re in the easy position.  We don’t have to do any work.  All we’re doing is storing the data and running the ICD-10 catalog back against the numbers we’ve received.  It’s no big deal for us to run ICD-9 and ICD-10 beside each other.  What’s really unfortunate is that the burden for ICD-10 falls back on the provider community.  As they struggle along to make that conversion, we’ll just start to accept the new standard as they move to it.
READ MORE: Five Blockchain Use Cases for Healthcare Payers, Providers
Interestingly, we’re also starting to see an evolving trend in the primary care marketplace where some vendors are encouraging their clients to jump over to SNOMED-CT as the coding standard.  Now, that’s wonderful, but they’re still going to have to use ICD-10 in order to bill.  But we’ve got one of our significant primary care clients that has made a recent move to a new EHR and they’re now wanting to send us SNOMED-CT.  That’s great, but what are we going to do with it?  So now we’re starting to accept it into the data warehouse, and we’ll just use it as another element to support the analytics.
Are payers involved in this analytics project?  Do they want access to the dataset you’ve built for their own purposes?
Dev: Both HBI and HealthInfoNet are doing very delicate dances with payers.  For me, it’s more of a political dance, because my sources of data, which are physician practices and hospitals, are a little more wary of how much access the payer community might have to their data.  We’re in conversation with a couple of payers, one of which wants to explore a partnership.  But that’s going to have to go through a process with the participants of the exchange, and they are going to have to accept or not accept why that’s a good idea.
I think there are some advantages for both the payer and the provider to have a shared, trusted data source.  I think we have a lot of history to overcome, and I think that the move towards risk-based contracting is actually aligning the incentives between those two communities much more tightly.  That may be the thing that allows it to go forward.  But right now, I’d be less than honest if I told you there’s a great agreement of minds here.
Eric: What we’re finding from the payer side is that most payers traditionally model their analysis on claims-based data.  The ones we’re talking to have been highly interested in finding out more about risk stratification of patients through clinical and administrative data.  They’re interested in tapping into these data sets that exist elsewhere.
READ MORE: Big Data, PCP Engagement Aid Mount Sinai with Population Health
We want to get to the point of using data to get to the point of driving change with in organization.  Otherwise, what’s the point?  So we’re actively working on tools that drive interventions so that a care manager or medical director can act on their real-time data in order to create immediate change for caring for patients, and see benefits from both a cost and quality standpoint.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureApplied AnalyticsBig Data AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceData StorageHIE AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


