Information Governance Must Protect PHI Outside the EHR

March 04, 2015

By Sponsored Content
March 04, 2015 - Over the last several years, most healthcare organizations have moved to storing all protected health information (PHI) in HIPAA compliant electronic health records (EHRs) systems.  Yet, over the same period, there has been an accelerating trend for patients to have electronic copies of pieces of their health information, which they give to their different providers as they move between appointments.  Here we explore this growing trend, the liability associated with it, and the information governance strategies that are available to reduce the associated risks.
With the increasing use of smartphones, tablets, and inexpensive computers, patients and their families have and distribute a growing amount of health information to their providers.  Some of this information falls neatly in the scope of the traditional medical record (e.g.,  when a specialist gives a patient a copy of a consultation record in order to deliver it to the patient’s primary care physician).  Some of this information opens up new territory. (e.g., when a parent emails a picture of a rash to a pediatrician’s office.)  This “patient distributed information” then becomes PHI, with all its associated compliance and legal burdens for the health care organization.
Within the healthcare organization, this “patient distributed information” is present on their various digital systems that are not the sanctioned EHR (such as email, file directories, etc.).  These digital systems were never designed to be part of the organization’s HIPAA compliant system, and never can be.  To date, the most common strategy to deal with this new reality has been denial, which eventually leads to catastrophic security failures that result in patient privacy breaches, and career damaging incidents for the healthcare organization employees.
However, there is good news – the framework for handling this new and growing problem already exists in the well established and growing information governance community.  We’ll use the rest of this article to highlight how information governance strategies and best practices can be applied to solving the problem of “patient distributed information.”
1. Perform a formal review.  Everyone in your organization has knowledge of an anecdotal story about PHI showing up where it should not be,  but a formal review is the best place to start to understand the scope of the problem.  Interviews will help your organization understand how your employees deal with and understand this issue.  Audits, usually done with software systems, provide objective evidence and quantification of the presence of PHI on your digital systems.  Together, interviews and audits provide a clear picture of where to focus your organization’s limited resources.
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
2. Establish formal policies and procedures.  In the language of HIPAA compliance, 100 percent compliance is the rule and the law, however, employees need specific policies and procedures to follow in each and every situation when they come into contact with “patient distributed information.”  For example, if a patient hands a nurse a thumb drive and says, “My old medical records are on here,” what should the nurse do?  Should they take the thumb drive?  Copy the files? Where to? A local PC? Into the EHR?  What do you do when the patient leaves the thumb drive in the exam room?  All these scenarios should be addressed in documented policies and procedures.
3. Train personnel.  Policies and procedures are only valuable when they are followed.  In fact, having policies in place that are not followed creates additional liability for your organization. Ongoing training and review works.
4. Automate.  A number of policies and procedures can be automated with software systems to ensure compliance.  For instance, information governance software can be used to automatically delete files left in file network common spaces—the kinds of places where people often copy PHI before they load it into the EHR.
5. Audit, Review, and improve.  Keeping “patient distributed information” off of your organization’s digital systems (and out of the news) is an ongoing task.  Auditing and surveillance of your digital systems is the best way to monitor and review your program, as well as seek to improve it.  Here again, information governance software can be used to automate the process of searching and reporting on the presence and location of patient data on your digital systems.
6. Finally, go for the “low hanging fruit.” Projects like this tend to swallow resources, budget, and time, but there is lower hanging fruit to go after that can make a real, immediate difference for your organization.  Focus there first to establish some organizational wins before taking on the harder challenges.
READ MORE: The Role of Healthcare Data Governance in Big Data Analytics
As a healthcare organization, you must acknowledge the increasing presence of “patient distributed information” on your digital systems, and have a plan for how to address it.  Simple denial creates ongoing and increasing risks for your organization. The information governance community exists and is growing rapidly.  Look to this community to help establish an information governance strategy and program to address “patient distributed information.”  With the proper policies, procedures, training, and systems in place your organization will be able to effectively handle and mitigate the risks associated with “patient distributed information.”
Scott Friedman serves as the the executive vice president at Sherpa Software. Scott has more than 15 years of experience in negotiating and executing business agreements with strategic partners. Additionally, he has a successful record of defining and launching new products. Scott received a Bachelor of Arts degree at University of Michigan as well as a Doctor of Medicine at West Virginia University. He currently resides in Western Pennsylvania with his family.
  Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceHealthcare Data Strategy


