CMS Offers Coding “Cheat Sheets” for ICD-10 Implementation

August 14, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 14, 2015 - The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is doing everything it can to inspire confidence in providers during the final few weeks before ICD-10 implementation.  As part of the Road to Ten preparation resource package, CMS has released a series of clinical coding “cheat sheets,” or quick reference guides that match common clinical concepts with their proper ICD-10 codes.
“To help physicians and other providers get quickly up to speed, CMS has launched the ICD-10 Clinical Concepts Series for specialties,” the ICD-10 website says. “Each guide in the series compiles key information from the Road to 10 online tool in a PDF format that can be readily shared, emailed, posted to websites, and printed. The guides include common ICD-10 codes, clinical documentation tips, clinical scenarios, and links to Road to 10.”
Clinical concept guides are currently available for a number of common areas of focus, including family practice, internal medicine, cardiology, OB/GYN, orthopedics, and pediatrics.  Each guide includes a list of the most common situations encountered by each of these specialties, and lists the corresponding codes that would be most applicable during each diagnosis. 
The lists include “unspecified” options as well as codes that detail laterality, both of which are key anticipated pain points for coders after October 1, 2015.
Dig Deeper
As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
AHIMA 2016: Expect Big Data Governance, MACRA, Value-Based Care
56% of Hospitals Lack Big Data Governance, Analytics Plans
CMS will also be hosting an MLN Connects National Provider Call on August 27, which is exactly five weeks until the ICD-10 implementation date.  Acting CMS Administrator Andy Slavitt, Sue Bowman from the American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA) and Nelly Leon-Chisen from the American Hospital Association (AHA) will provide updates, coding tips, and guidance for providers still preparing for the switch. 
Prospective attendees can register for the call by clicking here.
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


