Analytics market forecast to reach $17.1 billion by 2016

September 04, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 04, 2013 - Getting started in analytics?  You’re in the right place.  Gartner, Inc. estimates that the worldwide business intelligence market, which includes analytics applications for healthcare organizations, will reach $17.1 billion in 2016, and currently stands at a respectable $13.8 billion in 2013.
“The descriptive analytics have largely been completed for most large companies in traditional subject areas, such as finance and sales, but there is still a lot of growth expected for diagnostic, predictive and prescriptive deployments. Since many midsize enterprises have yet to even start their BI and analytic initiatives, we expect the market for BI and analytics platforms will remain one of the fastest-growing software markets,” said Kurt Schlegel, Research Vice President at Gartner of the February survey.   “Every company has numerous subject areas — such as HR, marketing, social and so on — that have yet to even start with BI and analytics.”
With analytics solutions vendors actively seeking out deals with healthcare clients, such as HP’s recent agreement with EHR giant Cerner, the market is in a rapid stage of growth.  “Cerner is at the leading edge of information analysis for health care providers, and we believe the HP Vertica Analytics Platform, gives them an edge in loading, managing and analyzing their data,” said Colin Mahony, Senior Vice President and General Manager for Vertica.
“BI and analytics have grown to become the fourth-largest application software segment as end users continue to prioritize BI and information-centric projects and spending to improve decision making and analysis,” said Dan Sommer, principal research analyst at Gartner. “As more and more information is generated, business models need reinvention, and it’s increasingly clear that mastering analytics on big data will be a key driver for the next economic cycle.”
Dig Deeper
HIM Pros Must Shift from Coding to Health Informatics, Analytics
Big Data, AI Rapidly Transforming the CIO Role in Healthcare
Dell, EMC Merger Closes $67B Big Data Analytics Deal
Analytics is increasingly being seen as an essential piece of any health system’s larger business strategy, according to Steven Summer, President and CEO of the Colorado Hospital Association, which recently chose its own analytics vendor.  “A robust data analytics capability is essential to effective advocacy on behalf of our member hospitals and health systems. We will model, understand and communicate the potential impact of policy decisions, which are vital for assisting our members in preparing for the future.”
  Tagged Healthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


