AHIMA Launches New Healthcare Informatics Credential Option

October 17, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 17, 2016 - Healthcare informatics professionals will soon be eligible to apply for a new credential from the American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA), the organization announced this week at its annual convention. 
The certification recognizes achievements in the interdisciplinary field of informatics, which combines data science, health IT optimization, and workflow management into a critical skillset for a rapidly changing technological environment.
“AHIMA’s certification is the culmination of a long-term initiative to research and develop a credential that measures competency and expertise across the broad range of content domains required to apply health informatics in diverse settings,” said AHIMA CEO Lynne Thomas Gordon, MBA, RHIA, CAE, FACHE, FAHIMA.
“With the demand for health informatics professionals growing, this credential is a valuable designation for identifying individuals who have demonstrated competency in the field and sets a standard for the health informatics profession.”
Dig Deeper
Nurse Informaticists Can “Triage” EHR Optimization Problems
56% of Hospitals Lack Big Data Governance, Analytics Plans
AHIMA Offers Clinical Documentation Tips for Opioid Abuse
Informaticists who have applicable academic preparation and real-world experience may take the certification exam, which covers the seven main domains of informatics: data analytics and utilization, data reporting, privacy and security, management of health IT systems, database management, health informatics training, and general project management expertise.
“AHIMA’s continuing commitment to informatics is demonstrated by this health informatics credential as well as our leading role facilitating the development of health informatics curricula at the graduate level.” Thomas Gordon said.
Clinical informatics became a board-certified subspecialty for physicians back in 2011, and the first physicians received their certification in 2013.  The subspecialty addresses similar data science and analytics competencies, but is more tailored to leveraging data in the clinical setting, while AHIMA’s program addresses the entire lifecycle of data as it travels across the entire healthcare organization.
“AHIMA draws from its many years of academic curricula development and leadership in informatics domains of practice such as standards for data content, information exchange and interoperability, data management, health information technology and others,” Thomas Gordon added. “AHIMA is leveraging its emerging leadership in data analytics as a foundation to support health informatics educators, students and practitioners.”
Tagged Clinical InformaticsHealth Information ManagementHealthcare Big Data AnalyticsHealthcare Data Governance


