Open EHR Notes Improve Medication Adherence, Engagement

November 03, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 03, 2015 - Providers may be able to improve medication adherence simply by showing patients their own data, according to a new two-year study conducted by Geisinger Health System.  Patients of primary care providers who embraced the “Open Notes” philosophy were nearly five percent more likely to stay adherent to their regimens of antihypertensive medications, researchers found.
“Providing patients access to their doctors' notes and reminding them to read them before visiting their doctor is key to reinforcing the doctors' rationale for prescribing specific medications and dosage," said Eric A. Wright, PharmD, MPH, a research investigator at Geisinger's Center for Health Research, associate professor of pharmacy practice at Wilkes University, Wilkes-Barre, and the study's lead investigator.
An article outlining the study’s results was published in this month’s issue of the Journal of Medical Internet Research.
"We demonstrated that encouraging patients to utilize a web portal to view their doctors' notes is a cost effective and efficient way to influence medication-taking behavior," added Wright. "Based on this study and our prior OpenNotes reports, increasing patient access to fully transparent doctors' notes should be on the radar screen of all health care providers.”
Geisinger has been an early adopter of Open Notes.  Along with Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC) in Massachusetts and Harborview Medical Center in Seattle, Geisinger participated in a 2010 pilot program that allowed patients to view their progress notes through a secure online portal. 
READ MORE: Gaps in Chronic Disease Care Leave Patients, Docs Frustrated
By 2013, more than 13,000 Geisinger and BIDMC patients had viewed their EHR data online, with 80 percent of those pilot participants saying that they felt more in control of their care, and 70 percent adding that they were more likely to maintain a high level of medication adherence after reading what their physicians had to say about them. 
Only a very small percentage of participants said they felt confused or alarmed by the information in their personal files.
In the most recent Geisinger study, 79.7 percent of patients who were taking an antihypertensive medicine and had access to their open notes remained adherent to their prescriptions, compared to just 75.3 percent of patients on the same medications who did not view their EHR data. 
The study, supported in part by grant funding from The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, reported less striking results when analyzing adherence to cholesterol medications, but participants pointed out that EHR documentation flaws may be to blame for the authors’ inability to pinpoint significant changes.
As patient engagement and population health management become increasingly integral to the primary care ecosystem, Open Notes has been lauded as a way to improve communication and empower patients without requiring providers to lay out burdensome investments in time or revenue.
READ MORE: For Opioids and Substance Abuse, Big Data Analytics Is Just the Beginning
In 2014, nine health systems and physician provider groups in the Pacific Northwest decided to give more than a million patients access to their medical records, believing that the process would allow patients to feel more connected to their providers.
“With the advent of the electronic health record, it has become much easier to securely share notes among providers and, as a logical extension, with patients,” said Homer Chin, MD, chairperson for the We Can Do Better campaign, the nonprofit, nonpartisan health advocacy organization that is organizing the regional effort.
“In light of the many benefits of doing so, it’s time that we engage and empower patients by providing them with easy access to their own medical information.”
While Open Notes have been generally successful, several concerns over patient privacy remain, especially in relation to the rights of teenagers and children to prevent their parents from accessing sensitive data. 
A New England Journal of Medicine perspective piece published soon after the first pilot results predicted a “bright future” for more robust patient engagement and data transparency, but added that the shift in data sharing may have an impact on documentation quality and completeness. 
READ MORE: Care Coordination, Medication Adherence Key to Diabetes Care
Some providers worried that they would be less likely to be honest about their patients if they knew that the subject of the documentation would be reading their comments, the article noted, or that they may feel uncomfortable recording an alarming diagnosis like cancer if they thought the patient might read the note before being able to discuss their health in person.
Nevertheless, the authors representing the three initial pilot sites “anticipate that open records will become the standard of care,” the article said.
“Given that more than half the patients we surveyed wanted to add comments to their doctors’ notes and approximately a third wanted to approve what was written, we expect that patients will soon share in generating content such as family and social histories and descriptions of their subjective experiences with illness.”
“Indeed, we believe that ultimately notes will be signed by both patients and providers, as they become the foundations for planning care, monitoring the course of health and illness, and evaluating care processes and outcomes.”
Tagged EHR and Patient EngagementHealth Information ExchangeMedication adherencePatient SatisfactionPopulation Health Management


