Boston Children’s using genetics to predict best medications

February 04, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 04, 2014 - Boston Children’s Hospital, the Medical College of Wisconsin, and the Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin Research Institute are partnering on a pilot to expand the use of pharmacogenomic clinical testing in order to match seriously ill pediatric patients with the most effective medications available.  In order to avoid the adverse effects of drugs that are poorly metabolized or ineffective, genetic analytics will be carried out on a sample of 1000 patients and their providers to test the feasibility of using genetics to make medication decisions on a larger scale.
While Boston Children’s has offered similar genetic testing since 2012, the new pilot is hoping to expand the program to patients with epilepsy, end-stage renal issues, IBS, and cardiology conditions.  These patients often require multiple medications, which may interact in unexpected ways.  Genetic testing is becoming an important way to identify potential treatments on a personalized level, identifying the most effective pathways while avoiding harmful or unpleasant side effects.
“If we are aware of the genetic information at the time of medication prescribing, we can often substitute another drug, or in other cases reduce the dosage to avoid the adverse reaction,” said lead investigator Shannon Manzi, PharmD, of the Boston Children’s Department of Pharmacy. “Ultimately, our goal is to offer this testing to all patients at the hospital.”
“We are excited to collaborate with Boston Children’s Hospital and to be able to offer clinical pharmacogenetic testing,” added Ulrich Broeckel, MD, professor of pediatrics at the Medical College of Wisconsin. Blood samples from Boston Children’s patients are sent to MCW for analysis.  Parents can also request genetic counseling to help them make more informed decisions.
Dig Deeper
Physician-Level Data May Not Reduce Opioid Prescription Rates
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
Open Population Health Analytics Flag Philly Health Disparities
“This project builds on our longstanding experience in clinical pharmacogenetic testing as well as our ongoing collaborations with other pediatric hospitals for pre-emptive testing,” he continued. “Based on the data from other hospitals, we are convinced that this test will help physicians in making better drug decisions and provide another example for the power of comprehensive pharmacogenetic testing.”
The researchers also plan to build a database of genetic test information to help providers analyze the results on a larger scale.  The data may also encourage more payers to cover genetic testing as part of routine care in order to prevent costly and dangerous medication errors before they occur.  The team will also poll clinicians, patients, and their families to learn how useful access to such data can be during the treatment process.
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig DataChronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


