EHR, Big Data Analytics Tech Support Key to Customer Loyalty

February 18, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 18, 2016 - Health IT vendors may be raking in billions of dollars in profits from their electronic health record and big data analytics offerings, but they may not be inspiring much long-term loyalty from their customers if they fail to provide adequate technical support for their products.
Waving goodbye to a hospital or physician provider after scratching off the last item on the implementation checklist simply won’t cut it in today’s competitive technology market, says a new industry survey by Black Book, yet many EHR and big data analytics vendors are simply not meeting expectations.
The survey, fielded in the last quarter of 2015, shows widespread dissatisfaction with the way technology companies support their clients. 
Of the 82 percent of hospitals that view high-quality customer service as a make-or-break feature in a vendor relationship, one-third said that their partners are currently falling short on their responsibilities.
One of the major pain points has to do with outsourcing.  The increasingly popular cost-cutting measure is supposed to make it easier for healthcare organizations to manage the huge number of IT tasks on their agendas.
READ MORE: Can Open Source EHRs Offer a New Path for Health IT Usability?
Sixteen percent of hospitals responding to the poll said they outsource at least half of their tech support burdens.  By the end of 2016, thirty-five percent of hospitals with more than 100 beds are planning to double their investment in outsourcing contracts.
But subpar service, poor communication, and a lack of responsiveness from third-party support suppliers is making some organizations rethink the strategy.  Nearly 80 percent of organizations that are using third-party partners are “significantly dissatisfied” with the quality of the work being performed.
Overseas tech support centers focused on EHRs, health information exchange, or big data analytics systems expertise have the worst reputation.  Ninety-seven percent of physician providers and 93 percent of hospitals strongly prefer technical support crews with native English proficiency, ideally based in the United States.
One hundred percent of survey participants said that negative experiences with outsourced tech support services has somehow tarnished their perception of a technology vendor’s brand and product offerings.
"EHR and HIS vendors cannot afford bad customer experiences, and with new revenue responsibilities, tech support organizations can't miss a beat to best serve established clients," said Black Book Managing Partner Doug Brown.
READ MORE: Big Data, Machine Learning Can Revamp Provider Health IT Use
"Unfortunately, many vendors leave tech support duties and quality to the users and third party outsourcers, yet it's turned out to be one of 2016's most critical components of client loyalty to their EHR/HIS."
Black Book has previously warned healthcare stakeholders about trusting too much to outsourcing tactics without first having a thorough understanding of the risks and potential rewards. 
While providers don’t have much choice about whether or not their EHR and analytics system vendors choose to push their tech support offshore, they can certainly investigate the vendor’s strategies before signing a purchase order.
"Enterprise tech support is a highly complex and niche area in healthcare, where specialists can make a big difference in client loyalty by catering from Level 1 to Level 4 product support to ensure all the provider's business goals are aligned with technology readiness," Brown said.
Big-name EHR vendors, including Cerner Corporation, McKesson, Allscripts, and MEDITECH, scored highest on tech support satisfaction in the poll.  Cerner was the only vendor to provide comprehensive, four-level support to its established clients, the 2200 survey participants added.
READ MORE: AMA to Connect Physicians with Health IT, Big Data Companies
Epic Systems, one of the industry leaders missing from the short-list, has previously failed to score very well on other user satisfaction and product usability metrics.  An October 2015 poll put Epic last among the major EHR vendors on ease of use in the emergency department, and the company recently lost its top ranking for inpatient EHR user satisfaction in a survey of clinical staff.
But EHR vendors aren’t the only ones looking to cut expenses by outsourcing support functionalities.  Many hospitals and health systems with in-house help centers are also looking to push the responsibility to a third-party player.
Eighty-seven percent of hospitals with more than 50 beds are seeking to slash their tech support budgets and shift the spending potential to acquiring new systems, including tools for big data analytics, population health management, and revenue cycle management.
"The key question to providers has to be, is your outsourced tech support provider equipped to deal with the industry changes, or better yet help your organization create a competitive advantage?" said Brown. "EHR vendors should be asking themselves the same thing about their tech support firm partners."
Healthcare organizations should conduct a thorough self-assessment before committing to an outsourcing plan, Brown said in November, and should address the following critical issues:
Define your expectations for an outsourcing project, and keep those expectations realistic.  To ensure that potential business partners understand what you want from the relationship, develop a clear, concise, and comprehensive statement of work to review before signing a contract.
Be sure to thoroughly understand what services are being offered, how they will be delivered, and how previous clients have achieved success with a prospective outsourcing vendor.  If geographical location of tech support staff or English fluency is a concern, be certain to address these issues during the vetting process.
Don’t outsource functionalities that are better served by in-house experts.  Outsourcing is not a magic bullet for solving workflow problems, interoperability concerns, cultural challenges, or missing pieces of the health IT puzzle. 
When budgeting for an outsourcing project, be sure to calculate and understand the full costs of the initiative, including ongoing maintenance and subscription fees, migration costs, hardware and software expenses, and reductions or additions in staff.
Devise a clear exit strategy should the relationship fail to meet expectations.  Be certain to review all contracts and documents for clauses that address what happens if one party wishes to withdraw from the partnership before the partnership end-date.  Secure uninterrupted access to any patient data or other information required to perform basic services should a disagreement or early termination take place.
Develop a monitoring policy that keeps outsourcing partners on task and on budget.  Ask for regular updates or reports on key metrics for success, and hold internal and external staff members accountable for meeting goals and user satisfaction rates.
Healthcare organizations and vendors that adhere to these guidelines are more likely to avoid user dissatisfaction and see a greater return on their investment from outsourcing partnerships.
They may also be more likely to take advantage of some of the predicted upcoming trends in the health IT tech support field, Black Book added.
The poll predicts that cloud EHR and other health IT applications will increasingly include one-click options to provide immediate help from within the program.  Tech support centers will need to develop appropriate internal workflows to meet the demands of instant communication.
Video chat may become a more popular way for end-users to connect more organically with support staff.  Live video chat can speed up the process of client support for issues like claims management and patient financial services tasks, and may even the playing field for less tech-savvy users with unsolved queries.
Likewise, social media support may become an increasingly valuable way to connect with unhappy users.  Twitter has become a popular way for consumers to connect with corporate entities, and this trend may carry over into the tech support space. 
However, nearly 70 percent of EHR and health IT users currently believe that companies do not monitor their social media feeds often enough to provide reliable help, and do not appropriately address complaints about poor service experiences.  This may change if demand increases to critical mass.
The complex world of big data analytics, including the growing interest in predictive analytics, will require strong technical support from vendors as end-users explore emerging capabilities.  As providers develop the methodologies and best practices for integrating analytics and clinical decision support tools into their daily workflows, they are likely to lean heavily on their vendors for technical guidance.
Health IT vendors and outsourcing service providers who are able to achieve high levels of user satisfaction as these trends develop are likely to maintain customer loyalty and grow their market share. 
As healthcare organizations continue to build complex, deeply integrated health IT infrastructures that are increasingly essential to daily operations and patient care, they will only expect more and more from their business partners.
Vendors and service organizations that deliver speedy, comprehensive, highly accountable, and knowledgeable support to busy providers are likely to be able to position themselves for success in a competitive and quickly changing health IT landscape.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR ImplementationEHR UsabilityQuality Of Care


