Personalized Medication Adherence Plan Cuts Readmissions by 70%

December 01, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 01, 2015 - From ineffective chronic disease management to hospital readmissions, few behavioral patterns have as much impact on a patient’s health as their medication adherence habits.  Patients who fail to take their medications as prescribed are not only contributing to millions of dollars in avoidable costs, but may also be setting themselves up for adverse events and relapses that land them right back in the inpatient ward.
At public hospitals like San Francisco General Hospital (SFGH), which see a large number of socioeconomically challenged and uninsured patients, the problem of medication adherence is a multi-faceted one.
In addition to obstacles related to paying for medications, maintaining engagement with providers, and accessing convenient pharmacies on a regular basis, patients at SFGH face an additional hurdle: the English language.
“We see a lot of indigent people, people who don't speak English as their primary language, and those who may not be legal citizens,” explained David Smith, PharmD, to HealthITAnalytics.com. “So it's difficult to do a lot of consistent patient outreach once they leave the hospital, and it’s not easy trying to empower them to manage their own health.”
“We have large numbers of Mandarin, Cantonese, and Spanish-speaking patients, and we also have Tagalog-speaking patients and a number of other populations,” he continued. “In general, it’s difficult for them to understand all their medications.”
READ MORE: Avoidable Admissions for Long-Term Care Dual Eligibles Down 31%
The hospital’s EHR and pharmacy systems are only calibrated to provide data in English.  For patients with limited proficiency in the language, discharge instructions can be inscrutable.
“We can provide medications, packages, and bottles in English, and sometimes we’ll try to do them by hand in Spanish or Mandarin, but it’s not pervasive,” Smith said.  “So that just adds another layer of complexity to the process of discharging a patient."
“When a patient leaves the hospital and they get pages of instructions and summaries in English, it sets the stage for significant issues with medication adherence, because they don’t always understand what happened or what they’re supposed to do.”
Even collecting data on what medications a patient is taking at home can be a cumbersome process.  SFGH is part of the county’s Department of Public Health, but siloed information systems and sparse health information exchange means that automated bidirectional communication is almost non-existent.
“Obviously, we would love to have an enterprise-wide EHR that would allow us to communicate more effectively and exchange information with other facilities. But we don’t have that capability right now,” admits Smith.  “We don’t have bidirectional data exchange with our local retail pharmacies, either, so it’s hard to judge what’s going on with our patients from that end.  The difference between a prescription being sent to a pharmacy versus being filled and taken appropriately is huge.”
READ MORE: 21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Instead of relying exclusively on limited health IT resources, Smith and the pharmacy department perform many of their critical medication reconciliation tasks the old-fashioned way. Pharmacy employees or technicians will make the rounds to interview between 75 and 80 percent of patients admitted to the hospital, collecting information on medication regimens with the help of translators, when necessary.
“Then we'll manually cross reference individual interviews with what their pharmacy profile says – with six or seven or ten different medications that might exist within our records, and then manually reconcile all of those to try and build a picture,” says Smith.  “It’s very tough, because even if they have their prescriptions, it’s impossible to know if they’re taking them properly without asking each patient individually about their habits.”
In order to ensure that patients were receiving proper education about their medications before leaving the hospital, Smith decided to create a small study using materials created by Meducation by Polyglot, including a simple medication calendar and a personalized intervention conducted in their native language.
To begin the study, Smith and his team identified a cohort of high-risk patients who would most benefit from the program.
“We looked at patients including those taking more than six long-term medications, those taking high-alert medications like blood thinners, insulin, and high-dose opioids, and patients with a new diagnosis of congestive heart failure, COPD, and diabetes,” he said. 
READ MORE: What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
“We also flagged patients if they were admitted because of their medications: if they experienced an adverse drug reaction, had a complication due to non-adherence, or had very limited comprehension of what they were supposed to do.”
The team screened more than 150 patients in five weeks.  Approximately half of those qualified for inclusion in the study.  Of those patients, half received the personalized medication adherence intervention, and half formed the control group.
The intervention included a tailored medication calendar based on the patient’s personal needs and discharge instructions.  “It's in their native language, and it's in very simple fifth-grade writing,” says Smith.  “It uses pictograms as well as a type of vernacular called the Universal Medication Schedule Language, which has been shown to improve understanding of how to take medication and adherence in prior studies.”
“The pharmacist would utilize this calendar along with the discharge medications in hand,” he continued.  “The team member would emphasize how to take the medication, show the patient what it looked like, and give them a survey at the end asking if they understand how to take the medication and if they feel like they can do it.”
Patients responded positively to the intervention, and expressed greater confidence and knowledge about their individualized regimens.  The study also produced a significant reduction in readmission rates.  Patients receiving the educational materials were 70 percent less likely to experience a 30-day readmission than those in the control group.
“We were able to perform the intervention with 39 patients, and their readmission rate was eight percent. For the control group of 31 patients, there was a 26 percent readmission rate,” explained Smith.  “That is much higher than the average readmission rate for the hospital at the time, which was around the 11 percent range.  But it’s also a high-risk group, so you would expect a somewhat higher readmission rate.”
“The results are probably more dramatic in a very small sample size like this than they would be if we included thousands of patients,” he acknowledged.  “But I think the impact is significant enough that we can definitely move forward with expanding the program.”
Improving the discharge process for patients to encourage better adherence and fewer returns to the hospital is a system-wide endeavor.  Starting with patient behaviors is a critical step, since up to seventy percent of non-adherence issues stem from bad habits, according to Express Scripts. 
In high-risk patients, these unhelpful behaviors can be compounded by circumstances outside of the patient’s control, such as impaired decision-making skills and lack of access to family helpers or community resources.
But healthcare providers, especially those participating in value-based reimbursement or population health management programs, have an increasing responsibility to help plug the gaps that cause many newly discharged patients to fail with self-management.
“When it comes to high risk patients, it’s important that you bring as many healthcare providers to the patient as possible, instead of just assuming that the system is going to take care of them,” asserts Smith.  “You have to grab onto any chance you can to make an impact with the individual.”
“And you have to make sure that it’s done in their native language,” he added.  “You can sit there with Google Translate or a human translator by the bedside, but if you give them a ream of papers in English to take home, they’re not going to remember anything you said, and they won’t necessarily be able to read those instructions.”
“That’s often overlooked when organizations build their processes.  You have to give them information that they will understand after they leave the building.”
Tagged Hospital ReadmissionsMedication adherencePatient EngagementPatient SafetyPopulation Health Management


