Do Hospital-Based Interventions Reduce 30-Day Readmissions?

October 28, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Hospital-based interventions may not have a significant impact on 30-day or 90-day readmissions for chronic diseases, one study says.
October 28, 2014 - Hospitals may not be able to reduce unplanned 30-day readmissions for chronic disease patients through transitional care interventions, suggests a study in the American Journal of Managed Care.  COPD and congestive heart failure (CHF) patients who received more intensive discharge planning, medication reconciliation, and at-home follow up showed no significant difference in their rate of return to the hospital at 30 or 90 days than patients who received a typical amount of post-discharge care.
CMS has focused on 30-day readmissions as a key measure of quality that carries financial penalties for low performance, and hospitals have quickly responded by implementing a variety of interventions to combat the potential revenue losses, write Ariel Linden, DrPH and Susan W. Butterworth, PhD in the study.  Care coordination tactics such as transmitting notifications of a hospital discharge to a patient’s primary care provider or supplying more detailed post-discharge care instructions via video or other electronic formats have become increasingly popular, but the new study questions the effectiveness of such tactics.
The researchers studied about 500 patients at two hospitals in Oregon and northern California with COPD or CHF, half of whom received traditional care, including brief patient education and standard discharge planning, and half of whom participated in an enhanced intervention program.  The higher level of attention included a follow-up telephone call, patient-centered discharge instructions, the availability of a transition health coach, medication reconciliation, and the scheduling of follow-up appointments before leaving the hospital.
The intervention group received an average of six coaching sessions from a nurse educator within 90 days of discharge from their initial hospitalization.  Ninety percent accessed intervention resources at least once during the study period, and 40% used the system on a daily basis for 30 days after discharge.  Despite the sustained patient engagement, however, there was no statistical difference in 30-day or 90-day readmission rates between the two groups.
Dig Deeper
Medicare Bolsters Population Health Focus with Payment Changes
Patient-Centered Medical Home Has Saved Payer $1.2B Since 2011
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
At 30 days, readmission rates were .23 per person for the intervention group and .19 per person for the control.  At 90 days, the readmission incident rates were .51 for the intervention group and .48 for the control.  Mortality rates were also similar, the researchers noted.  Fourteen patients in the intervention group died within the 90-day period, compared to 26 of the control group.  COPD patients in the control group were more likely to die than those in the intervention cohort, but CHF deaths were basically the same across both patient groups.
“Our study nurses reported that, at enrollment, many COPD participants had either been non-adherent to their inhaled medications or had been using inhalers incorrectly,” the authors write. “Intervention participants received substantial instruction on the correct use of these medications, and the MI sessions focused on evoking the benefits of the treatment plan. This may explain the reduction in mortality among COPD patients that we found.”
The researchers provide several possible explanations for the interventions’ apparent lack of overall impact: either the interventions could have been poorly executed or the patients participating in the study could have been so ill that hospital readmissions and mortality during the program were unavoidable.  They add that the intervention program did not include home visits or tracking of ambulatory follow-up care, which may be essential for an effective intervention strategy.
“Taken together, there is a real possibility that standalone community hospitals may have limited impact on the prevention of readmission for severely ill patients with COPD or CHF, despite the use of comprehensive, evidence-based interventions that are within their control,” the study concludes. “Nonetheless, instituting programs that increase patient engagement in self-management may still be beneficial, and the reduction in mortality among COPD patients in our study is particularly encouraging. Improved self-management may have been beneficial to COPD patients in our study because of the nature of the self-care regimen.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementHospital Quality


