CVS changes name, stops stocking tobacco ahead of schedule

September 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 03, 2014 - After announcing earlier this year that it would no longer offer tobacco products in an effort to transition into the patient care space, CVS stores have followed through with their promise nearly a month ahead of schedule.  The chain of pharmacies, retail health clinics, and drug stores has also changed its name from CVS Caremark to CVS Health, positioning itself as a patient care epicenter as it competes for market share against similarly eager corporate competitors.
While it’s possible that smokers could simply stop at a different store to buy their cigarettes and cigars, the action is a shot across the bows for other drug store chains, such as Walgreens and Rite Aid, who are similarly interested in transitioning from convenience store to well-equipped care provider.  Promoting healthy lifestyle choices to patients when they’re not sitting in the exam room is a critical part of community-based population health management, and other chains may start to feel the pressure from CVS’ drastic change to their image.
“CVS Health has taken this most welcome and unprecedented action to take tobacco off their shelves and it’s ‘game on’ for all the other large pharmacy chains,” said Robin Koval, CEO and president of Legacy, an anti-tobacco activism foundation. “Putting their money where their mouth is translates to a business model where public health and profits are complementary objectives.  It’s a strategy that truly puts consumers first – saving lives from the toll of one of the most lethal products available to consumers today.”
The White House joined in applauding the decision, with Press Secretary Josh Earnest saying that the decision is “an important step forward in improving the health and lives of millions of Americans.”  He added that the administration hopes “others in the industry will follow” CVS with similar cutbacks on harmful products.
Dig Deeper
Big Data Analytics, Population Health Top Executive Priority List
With New Players Looming, Healthcare Needs Big Data to Support Scale
Business Intelligence Tools Bring Insights to Organ Donation Network
As retail pharmacy chains expand into the provider space, the White House might not have long to wait.  In March, CVS announced that its rapidly growing MinuteClinic health centers would be getting an Epic EHR to improve continuity of care with traditional providers.  A pilot partnership with four provider groups around the country will also explore health information exchange and population health management techniques, potentially expanding the clinics’ reach into the physician office healthcare space.
CVS will also begin to offer a new in-store smoking cessation program that will include coaching for motivated patients and provide education for those who wish to quit.
Tagged Healthcare Business IntelligencePatient CarePopulation Health Management


