Cloud, predictive analytics helping healthcare inside and out

October 25, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 25, 2013 - Cloud-based predictive analytics is helping healthcare organizations identify patient-facing clinical shortcomings while also helping to evaluate internal staffing processes, revenue opportunities, and marketing challenges.  By collecting data on their own staff in addition to the consumers of their services health systems are creating a rich picture of the hospital’s health through analytics systems at an increasingly rapid rate, although according to a survey by Decision Management Solutions, healthcare lags significantly behind other industries in its adoption of these critical technologies.
“Organizations are starting to take a really deep dive into the data in order to make sure they receive the biggest piece of the pie to which they’re entitled and to maintain their positive reputations,” says Cathy Gorman-Klug, RN, MSN and director of quality service lines at Nuance.  “In the highly competitive healthcare environment, organizations are using data to review and trend performance: by both individual physicians, physician practices, hospitalists vs. attending physician, by nursing unit, and even by day of the week.”
The survey found that across all industries, cloud-based analytics is used widely to examine customer satisfaction and profitability, supply chain and business optimization metrics, risk and fraud concerns, and marketing opportunities.  Seventy-two percent of businesses now apply analytics to their customers, and more than 90% plan to use one or more types of cloud-based predictive analytics in the future.  Cloud-based analytics modeling is the most popular type of application businesses plan to implement this year.
While retail and financial services were the most frequent users of these technologies, and healthcare was 9% less likely than the average business to use analytics, 63% of organizations feel they have all the intelligence they need to transform their business when predictive analytics and decision management tools align.  For healthcare organizations increasingly investing in clinical decision support products to meet more significant requirements for the technology in Stage 2 of Meaningful Use, the confirmation that the marriage of analytics and actionable decision tools is effective may be a necessary boost of morale in the face of the jump to more stringent criteria.
Dig Deeper
HIM Pros Must Shift from Coding to Health Informatics, Analytics
Healthcare CIOs Turning to Data Analytics for Business Intelligence
AMIA, Dryad Partner for Healthcare Research Big Data Access
It can also provide valuable insights into patient populations in order to identify trouble spots and stratify risks and their associated costs.  “As we move toward population health, having the ability to look at data and your related high-risk patients to identify areas of vulnerability will help drive optimization of services and patient outcomes,” adds Gorman-Klug.  “At the end of the day, the true purpose of analytics is to deliver safe and quality care for patients and to help healthcare systems run more efficiently and cost-effectively.”
  Tagged Healthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare Data StrategyHealthcare Informatics


