“Most Wired” Hospital Turns to Integration, Big Data Analytics

August 10, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 10, 2015 - Each year, choosing the healthcare organizations that make it onto the Hospitals & Health Networks “Most Wired” list must get a little more difficult.  As providers strive to develop integrated EHR infrastructure and start to come to grips with healthcare big data analytics, the health IT capabilities of organizations nationwide are growing by leaps and bounds, raising the bar for their peers.
A few special hospitals will always stand out from the crowd, however, for their commitment to leveraging health IT for remarkable improvements in patient care.  St. Joseph Mercy Oakland (SJMO) in Pontiac, Michigan, a 443-bed community teaching hospital, is one of those organizations that goes far above and beyond the basics of using electronic health records for clinical care. 
By carefully integrating a suite of technologies into a sophisticated patient care ecosystem that raises quality, SJMO has been able to improve patient safety while allowing providers to communicate quickly and effectively with patients and amongst themselves.
Part of the Saint Joseph Mercy Health System, SJMO is no stranger to the “Most Wired” awards.  The facility has appeared on the list each year since 2013, and has achieved several additional recognitions for its health IT efforts.  This year, SJMO took home one Most Wired Innovator Award for its Intelligent Care System, and nearly snagged a second Innovator honor for its real-time big data analytics project.
In this profile of a “Most Wired” winner, Dr. Fabian Fregoli, Chief Medical Information Officer and VP of Clinical Quality and Patient Safety at St. Joseph Mercy Oakland, sits down with HealthITAnalytics.com to explain how health IT integration and a focus on quality has vaulted it to the top of class when it comes to big data analytics and patient care.
READ MORE: Alarm Fatigue, Health IT Woes Top ECRI 2017 Patient Safety List
What are a few of the technologies that comprise your Intelligent Care System?  How do they leverage data to improve quality?
The Intelligent Care System is a suite of eight technologies, all connected to a hub, which is our electronic health record. Then we have integration points with the other technologies. 
One of the technologies we’re using are Smart Beds.  They are integrated with our nurse call system as well as our EHR.  The beds help us do things like weigh our patients on a daily basis, and that data is transmitted to the EHR.  They are also important for our fall prevention strategy. All of our staff carry an iPhone on their shift that has integration points with the nurse call system and the Smart Bed. 
So if a patient is identified as being a fall risk, we turn the alarm on.  If the patient should try to get out of bed, the alarm immediately goes to a smartphone that all our staff carry around with them.  The nurse can then open a verbal line of communication and say, "Mr. Smith, please stay in bed, I'll be right in," to avoid a fall.  We have seen some really tremendous outcomes with this.
The beds also help us with pressure ulcer reduction.  Let's say a family member comes to visit, and they change the head of the bed angle for the patient.  Maybe it's supposed to be set at a specific degree based on what the physician has recommended to avoid sacral pressure.  We can set an alert that tells the nurse that a change has been made, so that we can monitor that, as well.
READ MORE: 21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
We also use data to support our hand hygiene programs.  The CDC recommends a wash in/wash out strategy.  So we've put special sensors not only at the sink at the patient's room, but also in the hand hygiene sanitizing station inside and outside of the room.  And every staff member carries a real-time location badge as part of their ID which tracks their hand hygiene compliance.  And we've seen incredible improvements in our hand hygiene compliance from starting the pilot.
The real-time ID badge is also helpful from an efficiency standpoint, because our staff members know how to find each other within the space, and we can communicate with each other more efficiently and more effectively.  Since everyone is carrying a mobile device linked to our communication platform, they can also text each other securely.  We have group texting available, which can be very point-specific, whether you’re trying to communicate with other members of the care team or even with the patient. 
As part of our pain management strategy, we have specially designed pillow speakers for the patient that they have at the bedside.  There are buttons that we specifically designed for our program: one is called “pain” and the other is “toilet.”  So if the patient needs pain medication, when they press the “pain” button, it goes specifically to their nurse, as opposed to a front desk person who then has to track down the right nurse.
And then if the patient has to use the restroom, we send the alert to a patient care assistant who can help them with toileting and whatever personal needs they may have.   You want to try to use your staff to their highest level of their training and capacity, so it makes sense for that sort of alert to go to an assistant instead of a nurse.  So it's really targeting the needs of the individual to the skills of the caregiver at the right time.
We have also developed communication protocols that allow alerts to be sent down the line to the next assigned caregiver if someone is tied up and can’t attend the patient immediately.  So the patient has a seamless experience and their needs are always met.
READ MORE: How Big Data Velocity Informs Population Health, Patient Safety
What other tools and resources have contributed to your "Most Wired" recognitions?
We have also received recognition for our iDashboards system.  It’s a separate project, but it’s part of the Intelligent Care ecosystem.  It's a real-time data analytics dashboard that encompasses a variety of data sources in a very graphical, very easy to use software platform.  Anyone in the organization can log on to see how many patients are waiting at the ED or real time information regarding available beds. 
It's a wonderful tool for management, and it's wonderful for our staff to be able to see our quality measures and our patient satisfaction measures at any given time on this graphical display.  It's taken away what we used to do with spreadsheets that were outdated the moment that you published them.  It's given us a real-time feel for the organization. 
Last year, we received a "Most Wired" award for our Vinsensia project, which has been going on for about five years.  It’s actually our first Intelligent Care System project.  It's a predictive analytics tool that takes five vital signs, including blood pressure, pulse rate, heart rate, blood oxygen saturation, and skin temperature, and runs those values through the algorithm and then it will return a score to the EHR. 
It lets our clinicians know how well the patient is doing from a hemodynamic perspective.  If those numbers are trending downward or the patient isn’t doing so well, we can deploy advanced responses to that patient very quickly. 
We have seen an incredible improvement in our transfer time to the ICU, and an improvement in our average length of stay, not to mention in mortality.  We have data from 20,000 patients in the system, which is really, really powerful for guiding the practice of our clinicians.  Just like any other tool, it can never replace the human interaction or the caregiving that we provide on a daily basis, but it does give us an edge when it comes to providing quality care.
How did you go about choosing so many different vendors?  What did you keep in mind during the selection process?
We were very deliberate when we started planning these projects.  We didn't just come across technologies and find a place for them.  We started out with a list of opportunities and places where we wanted to see improvement in our organization. 
And these are common problems that every organization struggles with.  Everyone struggles with falls; everyone struggles with infections.  But we wanted to see how we could develop an integrated system that would provide us with tools to drive improvement in our care and take us to the next level.  We've always been a strong performer in quality and safety, but we wanted some sort of differentiator and I think we’ve achieved some of those goals.
We are always looking for more integration.  We’re never satisfied; we’re always looking for the next great solution.  But we did select vendors very, very carefully that were going to be closely aligned with our Cerner EHR, because that ability to integrate is a critical piece.  Otherwise you end up with eight siloed technologies, and we definitely didn’t want that.  Cerner’s iBus technology allows us to very easily connect with other technologies to ensure that the data we need is available to all our applications and clinicians.
We don’t yet have all the integration points that we want, but we certainly have many and we are very excited about continuing on with more and more integration with other tools.  But we were very selective as to the vendors that we chose with their willingness to work with us and with Cerner for integration. 
What is your advice to other healthcare providers who want to implement similar big data analytics and patient care technologies?
I think the first thing you need is executive leadership.  First, you’ve got to have buy-in from the executive team, and secondly, you've got to have buy-in from your clinical team.  It’s about developing a methodology that ensures that the clinical team is driving the project.  This is not an IT project.  This is a clinical project with a lot of IT involvement. 
You have to keep your staff informed, during every phase of the project, about how these new technologies are going to impact their workflow and their ability to care for their patients.  Because if there is no win for the caregiver, it's really hard for people to be enthusiastic about adopting new tools.
But if they understand and appreciate it, it’s a completely different story.  This is something we saw early on when we started bringing our data back to the clinical teams.  We went right to the nurses at the unit level and showed them how powerful the tool is, and it really energized the staff, because they thought, “Wow, this is helping us do our jobs better.”
So we just don't add technology for the sake of adding technology.  It really has to have clinical benefit for the staff, and they need to understand that. Because they know it’s all about the patient, and they want to provide great care.  They just want to make sure that what they're using is going to help them care for their patients better. 
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsPatient SafetyQuality Of Care


