Health IT Orgs Pledge More Data Sharing for Patient Safety

March 07, 2016

By Jacqueline LaPointe
March 07, 2016 - Close to fifty healthcare information technology organizations have signed the Patient Safety Movement Foundation’s Open Data Pledge, according to a press release.
The Open Data Pledge aims to encourage healthcare technology companies to share health data to improve patient safety.
The agreement calls for more transparency and health information exchange across the healthcare ecosystem. An increase in data sharing allows engineers and researchers to develop predictive analytics for improved patient care.
“We thank each and every one of these companies who are leading the way to safer patient care by giving their data,” said Joe Kiani, Founder of the Patient Safety Movement Foundation.
Dig Deeper
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
How the Search for Smart Data Drives Healthcare IT Investment
Patient Safety at Risk as 52% of Adults Misuse Prescriptions, Opioids
“With data sharing, we will hopefully also unlock the mysteries behind cancer and heart disease and help identify therapies that are most likely to work. So what we’ve started here to treat the third leading cause of death – preventable patient harm, may one day even help the first and second causes of death.”
The forty-nine companies stated that no protected personal health information (PHI) will be shared, and all relevant privacy laws will be upheld.
Ed Cantwell, the Executive Director of the Center for Medical Interoperability, believes the pledge will bring benefits to the industry at large.
“We launched the Center shortly after the first press release from the Patient Safety Movement announcing nine companies had signed the pledge to share data,” he said. “With 49 companies making the pledge and the launch of the Center, we know that we are very close to making patient care safe and effective systematically, in addition to our extraordinary caregivers.”
The Open Data Pledge is another key step in opening up patient data for research and development, as well as ensuring accurate patient matching and bolstering patient safety.
The pledge is a part of the overall goal of the Patient Safety Movement Foundation to eliminate preventative patient deaths in 2020. By working together, the healthcare community can develop comprehensive solutions to reduce preventative deaths.
This news comes days after the Patient Safety Movement Foundation thanked the Government Accountability Office (GAO) for releasing its report on patient safety. The report explains the challenges that hospitals face when trying to acquire data that can be used to identify best practices, consistency of compliance procedures, and patient safety priorities.
“The movement has come a long way,” said pledge participant Richard A. Packer, CEO of ZOLL. “We look forward to continuing to work closely with the Patient Safety Movement Foundation in eliminating preventable patient deaths.”
Tagged Healthcare Data GovernancePatient EngagementPatient SafetyPopulation Health Management


