Clinical Analytics Adoption Lags behind Accountable Care

November 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Value-based reimbursement is moving quickly towards the mainstream, but organizations lack the clinical analytics technology to help them make the switch.
November 17, 2014 - Most providers agree that value-based reimbursement is on track to take over the healthcare industry in the next few years, according to a survey by EHR and health IT vendor McKesson Corporation, but organizations do not yet have the clinical analytics and business intelligence tools to make the most of the rapid pace of change.  While 90 percent of payers and 81 percent of providers already rely on value-based reimbursement (VBR) for at least a portion of their revenue, a lack of data standards and a reliance on outdated health IT has led up to one in five providers to categorize the switch to VBR as “very” or “extremely” difficult.
“The affordability crisis is causing unprecedented changes in the healthcare landscape, the most significant of which is the transition from the current volume-based model to myriad models based on measures of value,” writes David Nace, MD, Vice President and Medical Director of McKesson Health Solutions.  “Most payers and providers expect value-based reimbursement to overtake fee-for-service by the year 2020, but they face daunting complexity in integrating complex reimbursement models, and say they have an urgent need for next-generation healthcare IT to successfully transition to value-based models.”
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the organizations that anticipate the least difficultly with the transition are those who are already half-way there.  Accountable care organizations (ACOs) and regional markets that are consolidated around a few major payers or provider groups are in a better position to embrace VBR for the majority of their revenue, and are much more likely to believe that VBR will produce a positive impact on their bottom line.  For those providers who are not currently part of an ACO, nearly 60 percent believe they will join one in the next five years.
That will involve a significant overhaul of the health IT infrastructure that enables value-based care to flourish, the survey found.  Providers who enjoy good financial health at the moment are keenly interested in implementing population health management and clinical analytics technologies, other research has shown, which will help them overcome the primary challenges of switching from fee-for-service to pay-for-performance models.
Dig Deeper
Can Point-of-Care Analytics Change the Healthcare Equation?
Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
Machine Learning in Healthcare: Defining the Most Common Terms
Interoperability and systems integration are among the most urgent needs for 23 percent of providers and 41 percent of payers, the McKesson survey found.  Improved data collection and access to analytics insights was a top concern for around 20 percent of respondents.  “Both payers and providers state that the tools they most urgently need to successfully implement value-based reimbursement are those that help clinicians understand and measure performance against quality and cost metrics,” the report says.
While the majority of healthcare organizations already have the capability to measure key quality and indicators such as mortality rates, patient experience and patient safety, and clinical processes, only 37 percent can marry those metrics with cost efficiency measures that allow a more complete view of the impact of services on the revenue cycle.  Without a better dialogue between quality and costs, the transition to pay-for-performance may be even more difficult than anticipated, especially if organizations are unable to adopt newer technologies in accordance with the quick step over to VBR.
“The only way to scale mixed reimbursement models across markets is to understand and use the new technology,” the survey concludes. “By doing so, we can automate the complexity out of the human and organizational experience, and engineer better decisions across the board—all for better health in 2020.Value-based reimbursement is not only here; it’s here to stay. The vast majority of payers and providers in this study say that value-based models are not a fad. The choices for payers, providers, and clinicians are clear. And the time to act is now.”
Tagged Accountable CareAnalytics InfrastructureClinical Analytics


