Big Data, AI Rapidly Transforming the CIO Role in Healthcare

October 06, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 06, 2017 - Few roles in the healthcare industry are exempt from the transformative effects of big data analytics, and the Chief Information Officer (CIO) position is surely not one of them. 
CIOs are quickly expanding from infrastructure gurus and vendor relations managers into analysts and strategic mapmakers, says a new survey by Gartner, highlighting the critical influence of big data on all health system operations.
A cross-industry poll of more than 3100 CIOs revealed that 95 percent of executive leaders are anticipating or already seeing significant changes to their responsibilities in response to the digitalization of their sectors. 
CIOs are transitioning from delivery management experts to cultural leaders, engaging organizations in broad operational changes required to harness the potential of data-driven business intelligence. 
More than 80 percent of CIOs now say that innovation and transformation are now a core component of their job description.
READ MORE: Leveraging Business Intelligence for Healthcare Management
"The CIO's role must grow and develop as digital business spreads, and disruptive technologies, including intelligent machines and advanced analytics, reach the masses," said Andy Rowsell-Jones, vice president and distinguished analyst at Gartner.
"While delivery is still a part of the job, much greater emphasis is being placed on attaining a far broader set of business objectives."
Many of these objectives are rooted in two major trends: enhanced cybersecurity and the application of artificial intelligence (AI) to critical business problems.
“Digital security ranks high on the CIO agenda as 35 percent of respondents said they have already invested and deployed some aspect of digital security, and 36 percent are in the process of planning to implement some form of digital security," said Rowsell-Jones.
"CIOs are also increasingly adopting AI in their organizations. Predominantly, AI is being used initially, either to boost the customer experience or to fight fraud."
READ MORE: Artificial Intelligence Will Be Foundational for Health IT in 2018
In the healthcare industry, artificial intelligence – or, more accurately, machine learning and pattern recognition algorithms – are becoming important tools for clinical care as well as financial monitoring and data security. 
Combined with an enhanced focus on business intelligence tools that identify opportunities for improvement across the clinical, financial, and administrative spheres, organizations are actively seeking executive leaders who can combine infrastructure savvy with informatics skills and a grounding in data science.
Job listings for board room positions now routinely include requests for big data analytics skills as well as interpersonal and negotiation skills that will allow CIOs to drive positive change through the organization while overcoming hesitations that may arise from bad experiences with electronic health records or other health IT tools.
"Data and insight drive the creation, delivery and life cycle of digital products and services,” said Rowsell-Jones.
“Flow of information in the context of user interactions leads to better engagement and value creation for all parties. Analytics connect the CIO and the IT organization to far-flung parts of the organization where they can cultivate new relationships."
READ MORE: How Healthcare Can Prep for Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning
Many CIOs responding to the survey believe that their organizations are prepared to take a new approach to business solutions.  Just under 80 percent said that digital imperatives are making their enterprises more “change-ready.”
Other recent industry assessments suggest that executive leaders are acknowledging the transformative power of big data by committing to loosening their purse strings.  A November 2016 poll by KPMG and Harvey Nash found that more than half of healthcare CIOs expected IT budget increases in 2017, with a focus on flexible cloud-based technologies and data storage options.
Two-thirds of those CIOs added that improving their operational efficiencies and streamlining business processes were top goals for their teams.  Forty percent said that strategic partnerships will play a key role in achieving those objectives.
The survey also echoed the Garner poll’s assertion that CIOs are becoming much more integral to the strategic decision-making process as their familiarity with reporting, analytics, and data-driven benchmarking become fundamentally intertwined with the enterprise’s long-term roadmap.
“The CIO has never been more relevant or influential,” said Dr. Jonathan Mitchell, Non-Executive Chair of Global CIO Practice at Harvey Nash. “Participation at the most senior level of decision-making is at an all-time high. Many respondents report that they are also spending increasing amounts of time with external stakeholders.”
“Organizations are seeing the role of the CIO change from the ‘purveyor of technology’ to the ‘agent of change’ for the enterprise. IT organizations have largely cracked the problem of service quality and reliability, freeing up their leaders to take a wider role.”
CIOs have an exciting opportunity to take advantage of this trend and position themselves as critical strategic visionaries as well as experts in the day-to-day data science that will drive growth, revenue, and operational improvements, said Rowsell-Jones.
"The effects of digitalization are profound. The impact on the job of CIO and on the IT organization itself should not be underestimated," he said.
"In this new world, CIO success is not based on what they build, but the services that they integrate. The IT organization will move from manufacturer to buyer, and the CIO will become an expert orchestrator of services. The real finding though is that this is happening now, today. CIOs must start scaling their digital business and changing their own jobs with it now."
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureArtificial Intelligence in HealthcareHealthcare Big Data AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Information Governance


