Kansas Medicaid program sees $72.6M loss so far in 2014

September 10, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 10, 2014 - Managed care for Medicaid patients in Kansas is running into some significant financial hurdles as the insurers administering the coverage rack up a $72.6 million loss in the first half of 2014, adding to a $110 million deficit from the previous year.  The KanCare Medicaid system, run largely by private payers Amerigroup, UnitedHealthcare Community Plan, and Sunflower Health Plan, a subsidiary of Centene, has been bleeding profits despite modest gains from pay-for-performances bonuses, reports the Kansas Health Institute.
In 2013, KanCare shifted nearly all of the state’s 400,000 Medicaid patients, mostly comprised of disabled residents, pregnant women, and low-income children, to health plans provided by one of the three private payers.  While the federal government pays about 60% of the costs related to administering the program, and the private contracts were intended to save the state $1 billion over the next five years, the system is experiencing significant growing pains.
“These companies can’t keep subsidizing Medicaid to the tune of $100 or $150 million per year, and that’s what’s happening,” said State Representative Jim Ward (D-Wichita), a member of the KanCare oversight committee. “At some point in time, these are for-profit companies.  They have boards of directors; they have people they report to.”
The losses ranged from $24 million reported by United HealthCare to $45 million from Amerigroup.  The numbers don’t include about $42 million in pay-for-performance bonuses received by the managed care organizations for their work in 2013.
Dig Deeper
Users Opt for Integrated EHR, Population Health, RCM Platforms
Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
EHRs, IoT, Revenue Cycle Bring Opportunities for Healthcare APIs
Despite the financial concerns, patients enrolled in Medicaid have decreased their emergency room use and improved their relationships with primary care providers, argues Sara Belfry of the Kansas Department of Health and Environment.  “The point Rep. Ward is missing is that people enrolled in KanCare have experienced the benefits of coordinated and integrated care,” she said. “We have seen the benefits to consumers in a number of ways.”
The insurance companies remain committed to making KanCare work, representatives stated, and are looking forward to reviews of the rates for 2015 that may adjust their payment schemes.  “We are committed to the success of KanCare, our partnership with the state, and are proud of the programs we are delivering on to help more than 127,000 people live healthier,” said United HealthCare spokesperson Molly McMillen Malat.
Tagged Affordable Care ActRevenue Cycle Management


