86% of Providers Aim for Integrated EHR, Practice Management

June 08, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 08, 2015 - EHR replacement continues to be a major force in the health IT market, finds Black Book Rankings in its latest industry survey, as providers attempt to retool their infrastructure to meet the data-heavy demands of value-based reimbursement and accountable care.  The main concern?  For the 86 percent of providers seeking to deploy an integrated EHR and practice management solution, it’s ensuring that clinical data and revenue cycle management are aligned in order to support improved operational efficiencies and broad initiatives like population health management and quality reporting.
More robust revenue cycle management remains at the heart of organizational efforts to fully leverage health IT infrastructure, yet only 22 percent of small practices believe they are currently getting the most out of their practice management software suites, Black Book says in its full report. 
The market for replacement software remains fluid and lucrative, adds Managing Partner Doug Brown, as dissatisfied providers continue to define their own needs and seek health IT products that will help them accomplish their financial goals.
"Revenue cycle management and integrated EHR vendor loyalty among small practice EHR physician practices is still on a significant upward trajectory,” said Brown. "The EHR/practice billing vendor's abilities to meet the evolving demands of interoperability, networking, mobile devices, accountable care, patient accessibility, customization for specialty workflow, and reimbursement are the main factors that the replacement mentality and late adoption remain volatile especially among solo and small practices.”
Dig Deeper
How Do Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning Differ in Healthcare?
Early Adopters Question Usefulness, Maturity of AI in Healthcare
IBM Watson, Siemens Partner for Population Health Management
"High performing vendors have emerged from the pack as practice implementations succeed and fail, meaningful use attestations are reviewed, and users assess their vendor’s capabilities to meet their individual practice needs, particularly managed care reimbursement and ACO billing ," he added.
“The majority (70%) of smaller and solo practice physicians have still not settled on a technology suite or set of products that delivers to their expectations on meaningful use, clinician usability, and coordinated billing and claims, hence, the relentlessly moving EHR marketplace.”
Over the past year, 13 percent of small providers participating in the survey upgraded or outsourced their billings and collections processes and systems.  Eighty-four percent still believe that there is work to do in order to develop a comprehensive health IT infrastructure that meets their practice management needs – and those upgrades must integrate clinical and financial data into one seamless system in order to support the clinical analytics, patient management, and big data competencies required for successful participation in accountable care.
Ninety-two percent of providers looking for a revenue cycle or practice management upgrade are only targeting systems that revolve tightly around the EHR in an effort to create a more complete portrait of patient populations and activities as providers seek to stem the outgoing tide of reimbursement. 
The vast majority of healthcare providers, including those practicing through hospital systems, or larger networks, believe that they will see declining or negative profitability over the next two years due to declining revenues if they do not make more of an effort to develop integrated EHRs and more capable practice management technology systems.
In order to forestall a headlong tumble into the red, eighty-five percent of solo practitioners and small practices are considering outsourcing their billing processes, with 48 percent of those providers with in-house billing staff hoping to engage a third-party service over the next eighteen months.  The increasing popularity of high-deductible health plans is bringing an untenable degree of complexity to the billings and collections process, these providers say, which may be better handled by a dedicated service.
Black Book ranks Kareo, Inc. as the top-performing electronic health record and billing software and service vendor for 2015, tapping the company for the honor for the third year in a row.  Other highly-rated vendors include ADP AdvancedMD, athenahealth, Greenway, HealthFusion, McKesson, and NexTech, the report adds.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsPractice ManagementRevenue Cycle Management


