Managed care heats up in CA with new challenge to Kaiser

September 18, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 18, 2014 - Anthem Blue Cross is upping the ante on managed care in California by partnering with providers to create a care plan big enough to rival Kaiser Permanente.  With several big hospitals and other notable clients on board, Anthem hopes to expand its 23% share of the California market while providing affordable, high quality care for patients, reports the LA Times.  Population health management and a reduction in hospital admissions are at the top of the priority list for the new Vivity insurance offering that will include more than 6000 physicians and 14 hospitals across seven different health systems.
Kaiser Permanente has built a solid foundation of managed care in California, where premiums have risen 185% in the past decade.  With a robust EHR and data analytics infrastructure focused on community outreach and seamless delivery of care across a self-contained continuum, the Kaiser model has served as an example for other aspiring integrated delivery systems across the country.
However, Anthem Blue Cross believes that there is opportunity to muscle in on Kaiser’s grip on the California landscape due to dissatisfaction with rising premiums and an increasing desperation on the part of stakeholders to reduce waste, improve hospital efficiency, and streamline spending.  “Under the current model, hospitals want to keep occupancy rates up,” said Pam Kehaly, Anthem’s west region president. “This is in complete opposition to that. For this joint venture to succeed, we have to keep occupancy rates down.”
That means that providers will need to step up on preventative care as well as improve post-discharge monitoring and care planning to keep patients from bouncing back into the inpatient setting.  With seven highly competitive hospitals banding together under the new agreement and sharing the need for overall success, patients may have more options when it comes to care coordination and fall through fewer gaps in the healthcare continuum.
Dig Deeper
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
Value Proposition Hard to Find for Care Coordination Tools
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
Kehaly expects the conglomerate to provide high quality care while cutting costs and offering a substantial degree of choice for patients who don’t want to be hemmed in to a small HMO network.  She believes that the network can generate significant savings, especially if plans to share clinical data come to fruition – and if the member hospitals abandon their competitive ways to embrace the spirit of cooperative healthcare instead. “There were some points in the meetings when it got real uncomfortable,” Kehaly admitted. “These are big, powerful hospitals.”
Cedars-Sinai, UCLA Health Center, Good Samaritan, Huntington Memorial, MemorialCare Health, PIH Health and Torrance Memorial Health will be the founding health system members, but will also retain contracts with other insurers.  The California Public Employees Retirement System, which covers 1.4 million public workers and their families, will also offer the Vivity plan, says Ann Boynton, a benefits executive.  “It is really a brand spanking new thing,” she said to the New York Times.  “It’s such a completely different way to come at the problem.”
Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationContinuum of Care


