2800 Stakeholders Join Accountable Care Best Practices Network

March 27, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 27, 2015 - The Health Care Payment Learning and Action Network, a coalition of nearly 3000 healthcare stakeholders investing in the development and deployment of accountable care best practices, kicked off its inaugural meeting this week with pledges from participants to improve population health management, chronic disease management, and patient safety while promoting accountable care financial arrangements.
The Network, featuring luminaries from all quarters of the healthcare industry, will attempt to bring the principles of accountable care into action by building on Secretary Sylvia Burwell’s promise to the industry that 50 percent of all Medicare reimbursements will be tied to quality by 2018.
“It is in our common interest to build a health care system that delivers better care, spends our health care dollars more wisely, and results in healthier people,” said Burwell. “When government and business work together, we can all benefit. Patients can get the right care at the right time, doctors can achieve the best ideals of their profession, and health care can be more affordable for individuals and companies.”
The coalition has been greeted with enthusiasm by HHS and its members, which include major pharmacy chains, large private payers, patients, state representatives, consumer groups, employers, and providers.
Dig Deeper
CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
Value Proposition Hard to Find for Care Coordination Tools
“America’s hospitals actively support delivery system reforms that increase value and efficiencies,” said American Hospital Association Executive Vice President Rick Pollack in a statement. “The work of the Health Care Payment Learning and Action Network will be an important catalyst to advance such reforms.”
“The nation’s hospitals and health systems have been leaders in implementing innovative delivery and payment system transformation models – both public and private – designed to provide more effective and efficient care,” he added. “At the heart of hospitals’ work is the desire to improve care for each and every patient. We look forward to joining with HHS to learn what works best and to make these models even more attractive to hospitals, health systems, physicians and other providers of care for the benefit of patients and communities.”
Independence Blue Cross President and CEO Daniel J. Hilferty said, “At Independence, we’re reimagining health care and putting our members at the center of everything we are doing to improve the quality and bring down the cost of health care. We call that process human-centered innovation. It’s the foundation for every innovative product and service we create and every collaboration we embrace to simplify the health care experience and help our members navigate pathways to good health.”
The Network will serve two purposes: acting as a convener to bring stakeholders together through meetings, webinars, and workgroups, and as a facilitator to identify industry priorities, share developments, and create resources for participants.  Network leaders will help to foster a spirit of collaboration as members pursue their own varied accountable care initiatives, including raising the level of integration with pharmacy services to support chronic disease management, using predictive analytics and big data to prevent hospital readmissions, encourage the development of patient-centered medical homes and other personalized care models, and accelerate the transition to value-based payment models and bundled payments that reward improvements in patient safety, care quality, and patient outcomes.
“Rite Aid applauds President Obama and Health and Human Services Secretary Burwell for their leadership in forming the Health Care Payment Learning and Action Network,” the pharmacy chain said in its statement of support. “We are proud to join this important initiative and look forward to working with the Administration and Congress to drive improvements and innovation throughout our nation’s health care delivery system.”
Future meetings of the Network will be conducted virtually, HHS said, with at least one organizational-wide meeting per year.  Registration is currently open for any payer, provider, employer, consumer group, state organization, individual consumer, purchaser, or other interested party.  To apply for membership, please click here.
Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationPopulation Health Management


