Racial Disparities Rife in Medicare 30-Day Hospital Readmissions

June 26, 2017

By Thomas Beaton
June 26, 2017 - Researchers at the University of Rochester Medical Center (URMC) found that there are significant racial disparities for 30-day hospital readmissions rates between black and white Medicare and Medicare Advantage (MA) patients.
In the study, the team found that 30-day readmission rates were 13.2 percent among traditional Medicare patients and 13.1 percent among Medicare Advantage (MA) patients. However, black patients who had higher health risks and lived in poorer socioeconomic communities were 33 percent if they had Medicare and 66 percent more likely under Medicare Advantage to be readmitted to hospitals within a 30-day period.
Compared to traditional Medicare patients, MA patients tended to have lower household incomes and were more likely to live in a large metropolitan area. Among traditional Medicare patients, blacks were more likely than whites to be in the lowest quartile of household income, to live in a large metropolitan area, and to be an emergency case at initial admission. Black patients also had higher rates of uncomplicated diabetes but lower rates of depression.
Dig Deeper
Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
mHealth, Socioeconomic Data Address Diabetes Care Disparities
Collaboration, Big Data Help Phoenix Children’s Focus on Value-Based Care
“Our findings of persistent racial disparities in surgical readmissions despite the national trend are troubling, and they may suggest that recent readmission reduction efforts were broadly targeted— incorporating few incentives for reducing disparities beyond overall reduced readmissions,” the team said.
“Furthermore, concerns have been raised that the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program and the value-based purchasing of health care currently being implemented in traditional Medicare might have the unintended effect of exacerbating disparities in quality and outcomes of care.”
The team performed two-way analyses to compare racial differences in patient, hospital, and county characteristics for the traditional Medicare and MA groups separately. They also performed a general analysis to determine unadjusted racial disparities in the likelihood of 30--day readmission and potential differential disparities by insurance type (MA vs. traditional Medicare.)
Based on the analyses, the team found that differences in socioeconomic factors between white and black patients may have influenced hospitals to readmit black Medicare and MA patients who don’t have traditional access to care.
“It is also possible that black surgical patients tend to receive poorer transitional and ambulatory care after discharge. Previous studies suggest that compared to white patients, black patients may lack adequate access to ambulatory and rehabilitation services, have less appropriate social and community support, and have lower health literacy—all of which may lead to less optimal post discharge care and increased risk for readmissions among black patients,” the team said.
The team concluded that more research on care delivery strategies, risk-reduction methods, and how facilities like accountable care organizations (ACOs) can help to directly lower racial disparities in 30-day readmissions is needed.
“Our findings suggest that the risk-reduction strategies adopted by Medicare Advantage plans have not succeeded in lowering the markedly higher rates of readmission for black patients compared to white patients,” the team said. “Further research is needed to understand whether newer health care delivery models, such as accountable care organizations, will help narrow the gap in readmission outcomes between black and white patients.”
Tagged Accountable CareHospital ReadmissionsMedicarePopulation Health


