How big pharma uses big data to develop better drugs

November 05, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 05, 2013 - Analytics may have great potential to help patients at the point of care, but before a physician can use clinical decision support to pick a therapy for a certain condition, he needs to have options to choose from.  In order to create the medications that physicians and patients rely on every day, the pharmaceutical industry must churn through a lengthy and expensive research and development process that can cost billions of dollars and an FDA approval process that can take a decade.  With the advent of electronic records and ever-expanding information banks filled with millions of real-life patient data points, pharmaceutical research has gotten a big boost, both in bringing new drugs to market and finding better ways to use existing therapies for the greater good.
Despite the overwhelming number of ads promoting new solutions for arthritis, psoriasis, bladder control, and depression, a new drug takes many years to make it to prime-time television.  On average, a drug takes twelve years to make it from discovery to the market, and can cost an average of $4 billion throughout its development cycle.  Only one in ten drugs makes it that far, which means there’s an enormous opportunity to cut costs by using big data to predict which drugs are worth pursuing for the long haul.  By combining historical clinical data on similar drugs and using deidentified patient cases to model outcomes and predict risks for a target trial population, pharmaceutical companies can better focus their efforts on promising therapies.
They can also use analytics to figure out how existing drugs can be applied in different ways.  While familiar drugs such as Viagra and AZT were famously formulated to tackle other conditions before researchers realized they could be used for their current applications, there are an untold number of similar “failed” drugs that could be repurposed to fight different diseases.  In 2012, the National Institutes of Health announced a $20 million collaboration with pharmaceutical companies AstraZeneca, Pfizer, and Eli Lilly to identify such compounds, and companies like NuMedii, a spin-off startup from the Butte Lab at Stanford University, are making it their mission to do just that.
“We are cutting down the decade or more and the $1 billion it can typically take to translate a laboratory finding into a successful drug treatment to about one to two years and spending about $100,000,” said Atul Butte, MD, PhD, associate professor of pediatrics, explaining how a little-used group of antidepressants has shown promise in combating deadly small-cell lung cancers.  The Butte Lab has access to petabytes of data on medical research collected over the past fifty years from sources around the globe, positioning it as a leader in bioinformatics analytics.
Dig Deeper
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Precision Medicine, Blue Button Among White House Big Data Efforts
In order to discover the effectiveness of the drug, Butte and other researchers scanned hundreds of thousands of genetic profiles, scouring the data for patterns in a variety of cell and tissue types.  They looked at how certain drugs interacted with the cells, some healthy and some diseased, to discover what compounds may be effective in blocking certain detrimental expressions.  The anti-depressant imipramine was shown to cause small-cell lung tumors to basically self-destruct, leading to the first advance in many years for the cancer with a five-year survival rate of just five percent.  The first clinical trial for the drug was conducted just 20 months later, because the drug had already gone through the FDA approval process.
Without harnessing the power of big data, the drug may never have come to light.  Genetic and clinical analytics help create a shortcut for pharmaceutical companies seeking to unlock the power of existing and newly discovered drugs.  Development of pharmaceutical interventions may still be costly and time-consuming, but patients will be able to benefit from useful drugs in a shorter time frame as pharmaceutical companies delve deeper into the data that already exists to help identify promising avenues more quickly.
  Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig DataClinical AnalyticsClinical DataClinical IntelligenceEHR Patient DataMedical Research


