Sue Schade Receives CHIME Award for Health IT Work

January 08, 2015

By Stephanie Reardon
The award is in recognition of executives who made powerful additions to their facilities for Health IT and demonstrated influence through their compelling use of technology.
January 08, 2015 - On January 5, the College of Healthcare Information Management Executives (CHIME) and healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS) awarded Sue Schade, Chief Information Officer at University of Michigan Hospitals and Health Centers, the 2014 John E. Gall, Jr. CIO of the Year Award. The award is in recognition of executives who made powerful additions to their facilities and demonstrated influence through their compelling use of technology.
“An outstanding leader in healthcare and IT, Sue Schade has contributed her time and talent to HIMSS and the HIMSS New England chapter.” said Carla Smith, MA, CNM, FHIMSS, Executive Vice President, HIMSS. “Sue’s ongoing leadership as a CIO, her willingness to give back to the healthcare community, and her commitment to act upon her own values in improving health with IT illustrate why she has been recognized,”
Schade has been working in Health IT for 30 years, and has been a CIO for 15 of those years. Under her leadership, the University of Michigan Hospitals and Health Centers reached Stage 6 on the HIMSS Analytics Electronic Medical Record Adoption Model (EMRAM). The model is a process for organizations to use to analyze their progress on EHR adoption, track their accomplishments, and follow their progress against other healthcare organizations.
“I am very honored to receive this award,” said Schade. “I am passionate about my work in healthcare and IT. With talented and dedicated IT teams over the years, we’ve been able to make a positive difference in the lives of so many people. I’m happy to be able to give back, both personally and professionally through organizations like CHIME and HIMSS where we are developing the next generation of HIT leaders.”
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Business Intelligence


