Population health relies on analytics, community involvement

October 17, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 17, 2013 - At its heart, healthcare is an intensely personal experience.  A physician and a patient in a closed room, discussing intimate details of health and behavior rarely shared outside that particular setting.  But the impact of what happens in that room can be huge, for the patient, for the provider, for the community, and for the way the nation’s medical system functions as a whole.
Population health management creates a bridge between the microcosm of a particular consult and the macro-sized concerns about spending, quality, efficiency, and effectiveness.  Strengthening the connection between community trends and individual behaviors relies on a strong provider presence in the community, a focus on collecting data, and a plan to leverage technology to produce actionable reporting and actual results.
“Improving population health presents a major cultural, operational, and financial shift across a broad range of stakeholders,” says a new report by the Patient Centered Primary Care Collaborative (PCPCC).  “While our current system is designed to respond to the acute needs of individual patients, it must transition to one that anticipates and shapes patterns of care for populations, and addresses the environmental and social determinants of health.”
Forty percent of deaths occur due to preventable behaviors that could be managed through a more robust healthcare community, the report asserts, but few stakeholders are focusing enough resources on issues such as tobacco use, substance abuse, physical inactivity, and poor nutrition.  Instead of recognizing the impact of these issues after the fact, providers should use health IT and analytics to predict trends on a community level, by town or by city, to proactively address a population’s needs.
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
Time Needed to Improve Quality in Value-Based Care Programs
While community-based population health management is becoming increasingly important to hospitals and health systems, with 49% of providers in a recent survey planning to invest in care coordinators and 40% intending to boost outreach educational efforts, the United States lags far behind other developed nations in its patient-centered, health IT-enabled approach to healthcare.  In other developed nations, the PCPCC report notes, between fifty and ninety percent of physicians routinely use advanced health IT tools such as EHR-based alerts and reminders for preventative or follow-up care.  Only one in four physicians in the US uses such tools, and 40% reported that they lack either a manual or electronic system to do so.
As providers begin to shift their patient care strategies to align with new risk-based payment models and quality reforms, the incorporation of robust analytics capabilities presents an opportunity for providers to become leaders within their local community setting, whether through a patient-centered medical home (PCMH) designation or the formation of an accountable care organization (ACO).
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) describes the PCMH as a central resource for patients to learn how to manage their own health, receive help with care coordination and disease management, and incorporate family members, caregivers, and community resources into the quest for overall wellness.  “The medical home model holds promise as a way to improve health care in America by transforming how primary care is organized and delivered,” the Agency says. “AHRQ recognizes the central role of health IT in successfully operationalizing and implementing the key features of the medical home. Without these critical elements, the potential of primary care will not be achieved.”
How can providers accomplish these goals?  Through collecting and analyzing EHR data, sharing information between providers along the care continuum, investing in systems to provide predictive trend reporting, individualized alerts, and clinical decision support for providers, and stratifying risk to intervene appropriately when a patient presents a particularly serious challenge.
“Population health management interventions are tailored to meet the health needs of the individual, and are evaluated and placed on a continuum of health risk,” the report concludes. “Interventions are also tailored to meet each individual where they are on the scale and develop a care plan that accommodates environmental factors, such as levels of family support, culture, socioeconomic status, and even access to transportation. By tracking meaningful patient information, the care team can improve the effectiveness of interventions both for individuals and for entire populations.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig Data AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsPatient DataPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


