Will Congressional Ideas Improve Health IT Interoperability?

February 23, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 23, 2015 - With nearly four hundred pages of suggested reforms headed for the healthcare industry, the 21st Century Cures initiative is both a hefty addition to President Obama’s vision for precision medicine and a challenging proposition for the healthcare industry.  Health IT interoperability and the adoption of better data standards figure highly in the bill, as do strategies to boost medical research and collect more robust patient data for degenerative neurological diseases.
As health IT interoperability replaces EHR adoption as the new technology watchword for providers, how will Congressional attention to what has previously been seen as a vendor issue affect organizations, patients, and innovators?
The federal government has never lacked opinions on the healthcare industry, what with being the administrators of the nation’s largest insurance program and the source of all the health IT mandates, such as meaningful use and ICD-10, that have plagued providers in recent years.
These projects have inspired a great deal of disagreement and contention among industry stakeholders, and prompted a certain amount of vitriol towards HHS, CMS, and the ONC, but in recent months, it appears that Congress is taking a firmer hand in the quest to bring unity – or at least quiet and obedience – to the provider community.
Between the crackdown on the Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs for spending billions on a failed attempt to achieve health IT interoperability and a recent hearing placing the kibosh on hopes of another delay to ICD-10, lawmakers are taking a serious look at the progress of standard, interoperable data exchange in the healthcare industry, and the industry is coming up short.
READ MORE: Big Data, FHIR, Machine Learning Dominate Top 10 Stories of 2017
The adoption of meaningful health information exchange is shockingly low, and providers continue to complain about having their patient data held hostage by vendors who want to squeeze every last penny from their customers.  Interoperability is seeing some important progress from stakeholder groups like the CommonWell Alliance and the Argonaut Project, and may find an unexpected champion in the Department of Defense if the tone set by whoever wins its $11 billion EHR modernization effort takes hold in the private market.
Congress is not about to leave true health IT interoperability to chance, however.  In the 21st Century Cures Act, the proposed development of patient data registries, a clinical trial data system, and a framework for integrating patient experience data into future healthcare regulation will put the spurs to informaticists, data scientists, and software developers to meet high expectations from Capitol Hill.
“If we want to save more lives and keep this country the leader in medical innovation, we have to make sure there’s not a major gap between the science of cures and the way we regulate these therapies,” says the Energy and Commerce Committee’s website dedicated to the initiative. “That is why, for the first time ever, we in Congress are going to take a comprehensive look at what steps we can take to accelerate the pace of cures in America.”
“We are looking at the full arc of this process – from the discovery of clues in basic science, to streamlining the drug and device development process, to unleashing the power of digital medicine and social media at the treatment delivery phase. We know we don’t have all the answers. That’s why we’re asking questions first. We are listening.  We want to know how to close the gaps between advances in scientific knowledge about cures and the regulatory policies created to save more lives.”
The Act is broken down into five major sections focused on the use of data to improve drug development, treatment discovery, patient engagement, and healthcare regulation.  The provisions most important to data analytics and health IT interoperability are the following:
READ MORE: IBM Bets Big on Blockchain for Value-Based Care, Data Exchange
• Improving health IT interoperability and data analytics opportunities by establishing patient data registries for medical research
• Modernizing clinical trials, especially for pediatrics, by requiring the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to expand their research networks
• Developing stronger infrastructure for the advancement of research into neurological diseases, including the development of a national patient surveillance system to track the epidemiology of multiple sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease
• Addressing public concerns about healthcare delivery and regulation by increasing patient engagement through measures including requiring CMS to collect public input on proposed Medicare payment policies
• Reforming aspects of Medicare including revising the local coverage determination (LCD) process and increasing data transparency for patients concerned about out-of-pocket costs
READ MORE: As FHIR Matures, Healthcare Interoperability Comes into Focus
• Streamlining FDA regulation of medical devices and novel pharmaceutical treatments so as not to stifle innovation or slow the progress of important products to market
If even some of the provisions included in the bill are made into law, a number of federal agencies will have a staggering amount of work to do, and the healthcare industry is going to face another major revolution in the way it views medical data.  However, with an increasingly solid EHR and data analytics infrastructure in place after the hot iron of the EHR Incentive Programs, focusing on health IT interoperability and the development of registries, data banks, and better health information exchanges might not be quite so painful.
Vendors, traditionally the guardians of proprietary standards used to set them apart from their competitors, are seeing a shift in the market that is making closed systems less profitable rather than the opposite.   With the business case for health IT interoperability building steadily, and support flooding in from provider customers, patients, forward-thinking developers, and federal regulators, the innovations of the 21st Century Cures Act may be hitting the scene at just the right time to find success in a rapidly changing industry.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealth Information ManagementInteroperability


