CMS Sets New Patient Care Quality Metrics for Nursing Homes

February 18, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 18, 2015 - CMS is adding more stringent patient care quality metrics to its Nursing Home Compare website in order to improve transparency around the effectiveness, safety, and performance of long-term care providers.  Starting on February 20, CMS will unveil new measures that “raise the bar” for nursing homes that wish to achieve top marks for care quality on the public-facing listings.
Nursing Home Compare already uses an easy-to-understand five star rating scale for facilities, based on the results from onsite inspections, performance on certain quality measures, and availability of qualified staff to serve the resident population.
The new metrics will retool the rating system in the following ways:
• CMS will add two additional quality measures focused on the overuse of antipsychotic medicines for patients without diagnoses that would indicate the prescription of this class of drug.  The first measure will target when short-stay residents without schizophrenia, Huntington’s disease, or Tourette syndrome begin to receive anti-psychotics.  The second will monitor continued use of these medications for longer-term patients.
Dig Deeper
Decision Support, Big Data Analytics Reduce Hospital Blood Use
Liquid Biopsy, Machine Learning Can Detect Multiple Cancers
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
• Nursing homes will be required to meet higher benchmarks for existing publicly reported quality measures if they wish to receive more stars on the website.
• Adequate staffing levels will be judged on adjusted criteria.  Nursing homes must score at least a three-star rating on certain staffing metrics in order to qualify for a four-star overall rating.
• Targeted surveys of nursing homes will be expanded to better assess the accuracy of information presented to the public on the CMS website.
The adjustments are part of a larger, ongoing overhaul of the CMS Compare websites and a commitment to improved data transparency for patients.  A recent report by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) found that the five Compare websites for hospitals, home health services, physicians, nursing homes, and dialysis facilities provide inadequate information to patients.   The websites are “limited in their provision of relevant and understandable cost and quality information for consumers,” the report said.
CMS has taken the chiding to heart and has started to add additional information to the suite in an effort to better prepare patients for the expenses and impacts of choosing a healthcare providers.  In December, the agency announced that it would be releasing new data on accountable care participation and patient care quality to several of the sites.
“The performance information released this month will give patients and families additional information they can use to inform their selection of a hospital or physician practice,” wrote Dr. Patrick Conway, CMS Deputy Administrator for Innovation and Quality and Chief Medical Officer. “Health care professionals differ in the quality and safety of care they provide and these websites empower consumers with information to help with health care decisions, encourage providers to strive for higher levels of quality, and drive overall health system improvement.”
“This transparency is critical to transforming the health care delivery system to achieve the three aims of better care for patients, better health for communities and spending dollars wisely,” Conway added.  “CMS is committed to transparency of data about quality and cost of care provided by physicians, hospitals and other health care professionals.”
Tagged Healthcare QualityHospital QualityPatient Care


