RWJ to Explore How Big Data Can Build a Culture of Health

October 24, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
A series of discussions about the role of big data in healthcare, led by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, will take place across the nation.
October 24, 2014 - The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJ) has launched its Data for Health initiative with the intent of exploring how big data, including patient-generated health data from wearable devices and EHR data, can combine to produce a culture of health and wellbeing for patients.  Through a series of collaborative sessions involving public health officials, hospital leadership, and experts from advocacy organizations, the Foundation hopes to promote industry-wide discussion about the role of clinical data in the evolving healthcare ecosystem.
“The sheer volume and velocity of data at our fingertips today is unprecedented,” said RWJF President and CEO Risa Lavizzo-Mourey, MD, MBA. “As we build a Culture of Health—a nation where everyone has the opportunity to live longer, healthier lives—it will be critical to ensure communities can effectively use and manage this information in ways that help people get healthy and stay healthy. The Data for Health initiative will be a starting point for identifying what infrastructure is needed to turn this information into an effective tool for improving health nationwide.”
Representatives from the Office of the National Coordinator will be present at each of the sessions, which will take place in Philadelphia; Phoenix, Des Moines, San Francisco. and Charleston.  “We look forward to hearing and learning from communities about their vision of how health information technology beyond electronic health records can advance the public’s health beyond health care,” said National Coordinator Karen DeSalvo, MD, MPH, MSc.
In a blog post for HealthITBuzz, DeSalvo added that she hopes to hear from social service providers, community planners, members of local government, school officials, and residents.  “Since becoming National Coordinator in January, I have traveled to and heard from people across the county share their successes and challenges, and where their communities are along the health IT spectrum,” she said. “Through these insightful discussions, I have gained a better understanding of how diverse this nation is along that spectrum, and that it is our role at ONC to set federal policies that encourage innovation to dramatically improve our care delivery system without leaving anyone behind.”
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
Social Media May Provide Big Data Insights into Drug Misuse
State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
“Finding out what problems people want to solve and what health information they need to help solve these problems will help us better understand how to design the infrastructure for collecting, sharing, and protecting data in ways that work best for communities across the country,” said David Ross, ScD, director of the Public Health Informatics Institute and co-chair of the Data for Health advisory committee.
“Ultimately, we need an infrastructure in place to support ready access to information necessary for health decision-making,” added fellow co-chair Ivor Horn, MD, MPH, medical director of the Center for Diversity and Health Equity at Seattle Children’s Hospital.  “The data and the technology to build this infrastructure exist. But first we need to understand how communities are using and want to use the data, and what systems need to be in place so that it can be easily accessed and shared.”  The advisory committee will produce a report and a list of industry recommendations based on the outcomes of the discussions.
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsClinical DataPopulation Health Management


