ONC Pilot Focuses on PGHD, Patient Engagement, HIE Start-Ups

November 12, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
ONC hopes to smooth the process of bringing patient engagement, HIE, and care coordination technologies to the market through a new partnership program.
November 12, 2014 - The Office of the National Coordinator (ONC) is getting into the matchmaking game to encourage innovation and real-life testing of new products and technologies that focus on population health management, patient engagement, health information exchange, and patient-generated health data (PGHD).  The Market R&D Pilot will pair promising products with healthcare organizations willing to take on a little disruption to their workflows as they put new health IT tools through their paces.
“A diverse array of web and mobile applications are changing the way patients and providers interact with the health care system,” write Maya Uppaluru, Public Health Analyst, and Adam Wong, Management and Program Analyst at the ONC, in a blog post on HealthIT Buzz.  “These technologies accelerate the flow and availability of data, empower and engage patients in their care, and can help identify safety issues or errors before they occur.”
“Despite the rapid growth and investment in health IT, many startups still struggle to find pilot partners to build the evidence base that demonstrates their product works. For startups, acquiring such evidence is important not only to potential funders but also to their future customers – the health care systems, providers, patients, and payers.”
Dig Deeper
CVS Retail Clinics, VA Partner for Care Coordination, Access
How Data-Driven Care Management Improves Population Health in NC
New Epic Systems EHR, Big Data Features Zero In on Interoperability
The ONC program will provide $300,000 to six selected start-ups in a phased approach.  Each team will receive $25,000 when selected for the pilot and another matching payment after completion and an evaluation.  Teams will be selected based on the quality of their proposal and how well they capture some of the ONC’s top priorities, including the expansion of Blue Button technology, new methods to improve patient portals and the use of patient-generated health data, as well as tools that address transitions of care, medication management, and the delivery of care to underserved communities.
The ONC will help to match the selected participants to healthcare organizations that will serve as “hosts” for the new technologies, which will help the start-up companies overcome one of the most significant challenges during the process of development, deployment, and sales.
“Once an innovative new product has been developed, it needs to be tested in real-life care settings,” the Pilot Challenge website says.  “Understandably, providers can be hesitant to host this testing for a myriad of reasons – they may have had bad experiences in the past, be anxious about deploying new tools that could disrupt their workflows, or be wary of encountering more problems than the solution solves.”
“Without this, it cannot be determined how well the product actually works, making it difficult for the developers to identify the changes that need to be made to the product to make it more effective. Furthermore, without evidence of successful product use and customer satisfaction it is that much harder to acquire the venture funding that can fuel further advancement and allow it to perform well in the marketplace.”
“At ONC, we understand and value the critical role that start-ups, developers, and entrepreneurs play in transforming America’s health care system,” Uppaluru and Wong said. “Helping improve care and health, at lower costs, will depend on the innovative technology solutions developed and tested by the start-up community.”
For interested parties, a matchmaking event will be held over the winter before proposals are due on March 2, 2015.  Winners will be announced on April 30, 2015, and the pilot phase will last from August of 2015 until January of the following year.
Tagged Care CoordinationHealth Information ExchangePatient EngagementPopulation Health Management


