HINTS surveys dig into population health literacy for smokers

November 26, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 26, 2013 - They say there’s no such thing as a free lunch, but the National Cancer Institute (NCI) is paying tobacco users enough for a nice dinner if they participate in a survey intended to garner a better idea of how smokers view their own bad habits and the health consequences of lighting up.  As part of the wider effort involved in NCI’s decade-long Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS), researchers will be conducting paid focus groups that will help test new questions for the HINTS project while revealing how people search for health information online and interact with their providers in order to pinpoint the best ways to reach out to populations and keep tabs on troubling behaviors.
NCI has been asking tobacco use questions since 2003 as part of its ongoing survey series, which also covers other cancers, mental health issues, physical activity, sleep quality, and a variety of questions on health IT and communications technologies.  Between 2011 and 2014, the survey will reach more than 17,000 people to ask them about the effects of health communication efforts, in part by gauging their literacy on disease risks, outcomes, and preventions.
Questions such as “do you agree that vitamins can undo most of the effects of smoking” and “how many people who develop lung cancer do you think are cured” can provide valuable insight into what areas of knowledge should be addressed by community outreach programs, primary care providers, and other educators.  Much of the data is available to the public and is also published in scientific journals at regular intervals.
For example, results from 2011 indicate that three quarters of current smokers believe that a person’s behavior can influence the risk of cancer, while 86% of those who never smoked and 82% of those who had quit think that habits can raise the likelihood of disease.  While few people believed that vitamins can negate the effects of smoking, and there was a widespread acknowledgement that many lung cancer cases are fatal, such data clearly defines knowledge gaps among Americans that can be addressed on the primary care level through tobacco use screenings.
Dig Deeper
NIH Opens Up “All of Us” to Research Participants Nationwide
Cancer Mortality Rates See 20% Drop, but Disparities Remain
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
The HINTS project will also be used as the data source for measuring the progress of the Healthy People 2020 quality improvement objectives fielded by HHS.  “Tobacco use is the single most preventable cause of death and disease in the United States,” the Healthy People website states.  “Each year, approximately 443,000 Americans die from tobacco-related illnesses. For every person who dies from tobacco use, 20 more people suffer with at least 1 serious tobacco-related illness. In addition, tobacco use costs the U.S. $193 billion annually in direct medical expenses and lost productivity.”
The Healthy People objectives for tobacco use reduction include limiting access to cigarettes and other tobacco products, reducing positive advertising from tobacco companies, and providing resources for patients to control or eliminate their tobacco use through provider-centric programs.  To that end, HINTS also collects information on how patients are interacting with their providers “to assess progress related to other strategic public initiatives such as those related to patient-centered outcomes research, health care reform and accountability, and a greater interest in learning about or participating in clinical trials.”
  Tagged Big DataEHR Patient DataMedical ResearchmHealth and Population HealthPatient CareQuality Of Care


