Accountable Care Takes New Forms as Fee-for-Service Fades

February 06, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 06, 2015 - Accountable care agreements are proliferating in shape and structure as healthcare providers begin to leave behind fee-for-service reimbursement in earnest.  While hundreds of new organizations are engaging in the standard risk-sharing arrangement every year, some are taking collaborative care and population health management to new heights with innovative structures to improve care quality and reduce costs.
The Texas Medical Association (TMA) has formed a partnership with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas that brings value-based care directly to providers. TMA PracticeEdge will help the society’s 48,000 physicians to acquire the skills and tools to bring coordinated care to their individual settings without being formally tied to an accountable care organization.
With two-thirds of physicians in Texas practicing independently or in physician-controlled settings, many providers lack the scale and resources to form accountable care agreements with their major payer partners.  With a focus on streamlining workflows to prevent providers from feeling overwhelmed by EHR data entry and reporting, PracticeEdge will help providers form care coordination practices and develop team-based care to bring population health management to smaller facilities while helping them remain independent.
“This represents a significant investment in our relationship with the TMA and Texas physicians, and will benefit our members, who value their relationships with their independent physicians,” said Bert Marshall, President of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas.
Dig Deeper
Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
“BCBSTX will work with TMA to give physicians alternatives to today’s fee-for-service system,” added TMA President Austin I. King, MD. “With today’s announcement, BCBSTX becomes the first health insurer to stand by independent Texas physicians in support of 21st century patient care.”
Meanwhile, Cone Health in Greensboro, North Carolina is taking both sides of the arrangement into its own hands by exploring the possibility of offering its own insurance plan, reports the News & Record.  “We’re moving from a sick-care system to the well-care system,” said Steve Neorr, vice president and executive director of Triad HealthCare Network, the organization of 900 physicians employed by Cone or in private practice in the region.
Cone Health has had a previous accountable care agreement with Humana, which gave them the idea for shouldering more financial risk, using Triad HealthCare providers as a base for a new network.  While hospital officials have stressed that no official plan has been developed, and any in-house insurance would likely not displace existing relationships, the system has already invested $7 million in the potential program.
The National Association of ACOs (NAACOS) is encouraging this ongoing development of accountable care arrangements by publishing its comments on CMS’ proposed rulemaking for improving the Medicare Shared Savings Program (MSSP).  With the majority of ACOs only accepting one-sided risk, bolstering this platform is essential before organizations shoulder even more financial responsibility, NAACOS says.
The organization suggests improving the incentive structure to improve care quality, give ACOs the option to waive Medicare copays to encourage sustained contact with the healthcare system, increase savings ratios to foster participation, and better align benchmarks to meet regional needs.
“NAACOS believes that ACOs continue to be the most promising market-based solution to improving quality and lowering healthcare cost growth,” said NAACOS CEO, Clif Gaus.  “We hope to work with CMS, the Administration and the Congress to make further adjustments to the program so that more Medicare beneficiaries and providers are able to participate and benefit from the program’s success.”
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsHealthcare Business Intelligence


