Devin Jopp Resigns as President and CEO of WEDI

January 13, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 13, 2016 - WEDI President and CEO, Devin Jopp, EdD, has tendered his resignation after four years leading the national health IT organization.
WEDI has been a significant voice for the improvement of health information exchange, health data interoperability, data integrity, and patient matching during Jopp’s tenure.
“It has been a true pleasure serving WEDI and its incredible members over the past four years,” said Dr. Jopp. As I look ahead, I remain extremely excited about the future of the organization and the important role that WEDI plays in promoting the effective use of health information technology.”
During his time at the organization, Jopp oversaw the release of the landmark 2013 WEDI Report, which identified interoperability, patient engagement, the rise of alternative payment models, and an increase in innovative patient encounter models as the four critical keys to building a stronger, higher-quality healthcare system.
Dig Deeper
Blockchain Activity Grows Sharply for Healthcare Payers, Providers
Provider Data Management Offers Payers a Blockchain Use Case
What Healthcare IT Users Don’t Really Need to Know about FHIR
Jopp also championed the Virtual Clipboard initiative, a collaborative project to improve patient matching and data reconciliation in the absence of a national patient identifier or other data harmonization strategy.
“The industry has been focused on interoperability, but that’s really been trying to get the data between institutions flowing. That’s been a challenge – let alone getting it to the patient,” Jopp told HealthITAnalytics at the beginning of 2015.
“We thought it was time to start using the smart technology and the mobile devices that we have now, and figure out a way that we, as an industry, can come up with a framework to accomplish this.”
The project, led by the Sullivan Institute for Healthcare Innovation, WEDI, HIMSS, and MGMA, moved into its pilot phase last July.
The WEDI Board of Directors “expresses its appreciation to Dr. Jopp for his service as CEO over the past four years and we wish him well in his future endeavors,” said Jean Narcisi, chair of the WEDI Board of Directors in a public statement. The board has formed a search committee to find a new candidate to fill Jopp’s role. 
“WEDI remains steadfast in its commitment to improving the quality of healthcare through effective and efficient information exchange, and we look forward to a new year of growth, innovation and collaboration with our members.”
In a comment to HealthITAnalytics.com, Narcisi added, “With any transition like this one, it is essential to remain focused on overarching goal.  WEDI is taking this opportunity to reinvigorate it’s focus on 2016 – an important year for healthcare IT. The association’s workgroups remain hard at work in driving innovation and furthering the progress they’re making toward the important Virtual Clipboard initiative, and the much-anticipated 25thAnnual National Conference.”
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsHealth Information ExchangeHealthcare Data Governance


