Six Ways to Foster an Environment of Patient-Centered Care

October 22, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 22, 2014 - The Patient Experience Council offers six suggestions for creating a patient-centered care environment for engaged, empowered patients.
Patient-centered care and the patient-centered medical home (PCMH) are considered the hallmarks of a newly accountable, conscientious, and high quality healthcare ecosystem, but building strong relationships with patients that take into account their needs, desires, quirks, and questions can be a daunting proposition.  The Patient Experience Council (PXC) at The Sullivan Institute has released a set of guiding principles that intend to aid healthcare organizations as they transition to a service-oriented mentality.
“As healthcare stakeholders explore strategies to deliver more patient-centric care, products and services, we see these Guiding Principles serving as the next step to ensuring that the patient engagement strategies being considered result in patient-experience centered outcomes,” said Kym Martin, MBA, CNC, CFT, Co-Chair of The Sullivan Institute’s Patient Experience Council in a press release.
Broken into six major areas, the guidance reinforces the notion that patients are the owners of their own health, and must be encouraged to create partnerships with healthcare providers in order to achieve the goals of the Triple Aim: reduced costs, improved quality, and a better patient experience.
Dig Deeper
CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
Over 80% of Nurses See Increased Role in Patient Management
CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
Clearly defining roles for the care team and the patient: Patients should be educated about their responsibilities and accountability for their own health, but providers must also learn to adapt to their new role as coaches and partners, not just the writers of prescriptions or the givers of bad news.  Providers and patients must both clearly communicate their roles throughout the relationship wherever the patient touches the continuum of care.
Conducting assessments of skills and competencies: Some patients are more able to take responsibility for themselves than others, and providers must establish a baseline of engagement, health literacy, and decision-making abilities before diving into a complicated care plan.  Providers must also match their skills and expertise with the level and type of services being provided in order to reduce the opportunities for misdiagnosis, mistreatment, or patient harm.
Putting patients in the driver’s seat: The patient is ultimately responsible for making final decisions about his or her health, and providers should not force their opinions onto the patient.  Choices should be framed in a neutral manner with the support and expertise of the clinician providing a strong foundation for informed decision-making.
Providing patients with access to their data: Patients must have the right and ability to access their personal health information, establish restrictions on who can view and edit their data, and decide how their data should be used.
Ensuring data accuracy: Patient data must be as current and accurate as possible, and should be in a format that is easy and intuitive for the patient to understand.  Providers should ensure that patients have the opportunity to ask questions about their data or make corrections to applicable information in order to ensure accuracy and veracity.
Adhering to privacy and security: Healthcare providers have the responsibility to ensure that patient data is stored and transmitted securely.  Only authorized, authenticated persons may access patient information, and providers must adhere both to HIPAA regulations and to patient access preferences across the care continuum.
By adhering to these guidelines, providers can foster better relationships with patients who feel more in control of their own care.  Healthcare organizations may see a significant return on their investment in this new patient-centered ecosystem through better engagement, improved performance, lowered costs, and fewer health emergencies from responsible, accountable patients.
“The 2013 WEDI Report envisioned the future of healthcare information exchange with the patient in the middle,” said Devin Jopp, Ed.D, President and CEO, WEDI. “I believe that the principles being released today by our Patient Experience Council will help provide a framework for how organizations should orient their efforts in order to prepare for the future landscape of healthcare.”
  Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationPatient Care


