NY Public, Private HIEs Connect for Population Health Management

June 19, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 19, 2017 - Public and private health information exchange (HIE) networks in New York State are teaming up to improve population health management in the nation’s most crowded metropolitan region.
Healthix, the largest public HIE in the country, has connected its data exchange system to private HIEs run by Northwell Health and Mount Sinai Health System, the organizations announced.
The integration will allow every member of the Healthix network – as well those connected to the Statewide Health Information Network of New York (SHIN-NY) – to view real-time patient data from the two private HIEs, giving clinicians rapid insight into the care of more than 16 million patients participating in the exchange.
Dig Deeper
Epic Systems, Cerner Remain Leading Population Health Companies
How Care Management, Care Coordination Differ in Health IT
Data Integrity Strategies for Patient Matching, Identification
“The robust set of clinical data generated by Northwell Health and the Mount Sinai Health System, available in real time, to participants in the Healthix network and across the SHIN-NY, will soon expand to include the complete Common Clinical Data Set promoted by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC),” said Tom Check, President and CEO of Healthix.
The collaboration will help providers across the state close gaps in patient data that may have prevented optimally informed decision-making.  In addition to encounter data and lab results, providers will now be able to access information including allergies, immunizations, and other documents that can be critical for patient safety and population health management.
“Connecting our information systems with others was challenging with traditional interfaces, and ongoing maintenance was expensive; we had more than 40 interfaces to manage,” said Dr. Vish Anantraman, Chief Information Architect, in Northwell Health’s Information Technology group.
“Now with just one interface, we can easily send all the data from our systems to Healthix and the SHIN-NY, it is less expensive to operate, and we have richer clinical data for care coordination.”
Healthix also includes home health providers, behavioral health providers, and long-term care providers as well as organizations across the inpatient and outpatient setting, the press release added.  The New York City correctional system is also a Healthix participant, as are a number of independent labs, radiology centers, and pharmacies.
The enhanced health information exchange capabilities will also support the state’s ongoing efforts to expand its Delivery System Reform Incentive Payment (DSRIP) programs, which focus on improving the region’s Medicaid care. 
Access to comprehensive population health management data will be vital for program participants who are aiming to reduce avoidable hospital utilization by 25 percent over the next five years.
“In just a couple months, we are already seeing a deep integration, and the efficiency of providers has increased dramatically,” said Donny Patel, Director of Interoperability and IT at the Mount Sinai Health System. “Not just providers, but also health plans will be using the HealthShare platform. One of our insurance partners is looking at it from a care management perspective.”
Tagged Care CoordinationHealth Data ExchangeHealth Information ExchangeInteroperabilityPopulation Health Management


