UT Southwestern Receives $9.6M Precision Medicine Research Grant

August 30, 2016

By Nathan Boroyan
August 30, 2016 - The Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) has awarded the University of Texas $9.6 million to the University of Texas Southwestern for six new precision medicine research projects aiming to address the origins and treatments of cancer
CPRIT's funding will allow University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center researchers to learn to understand the growth of cancer cells; apply new methods of targeting lung cancer treatments; screen high-risk and disadvantage patient populations to help prevent colorectal cancer; and engagement in breast cancer survivor outreach.
UT Southwestern will receive an additional $4 million in new recruitment grants from CPRIT, which will be paired with a previous $4 million recruitment grant from CPRIT announced in May, to help attract new cancer researchers with interests in applying precision medicine techniques to cancer.
There are currently 34 cancer researchers on the UT Southwestern campus who have been attracted to the institution thanks to CPRIT funding.
Dig Deeper
FDA Asks for Input on Modernizing to Meet Public Health Needs
Six Pediatric Hospitals Create Personalized Medicine Coalition
Broader Availability of Genetic Testing a Boon for Precision Care
"Funding by Texas taxpayers through CPRIT has been fundamental in advancing our initiatives to develop better therapies and expand prevention efforts, as well as attracting top scientists from around the country to bring their knowledge, expertise and accompanying resources to our state," said Dr. Daniel K. Podolsky, President of UT Southwestern, who holds the Philip O'Bryan Montgomery, Jr., M.D. Distinguished Presidential Chair in Academic Administration, in a public statement. "The exciting research that these awards will support will continue that success and bring us further toward our goal of reducing and eventually eliminating the terrible burden of cancer."
Including the most recent rounds of funding, CPRIT has awarded UT Southwestern researchers a total of more than $331 million, increasing the school's chances for more grant money for basic science research, translational research and outreach and prevention programs.
"Our cancer researchers are continually seeking and finding new solutions to better understand, diagnose, and treat cancer," said Dr. Melanie Cobb, Interim Director of the Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center in a public statement. "This effort includes a wide range of projects, from basic scientific findings at the molecular and cellular level needed to understand how cancer develops and spreads, to prevention and outreach efforts.
CPRIT has awarded more than $1.64 billion in grant funding to Texas researchers.
The recent funding continues the trend towards providing grants to academic institutions to target precision medicine research.
In July, both Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC) and the University of Arizona Health Sciences in partnership with Banner Health announced millions in funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) over a five-year period.
  The University of Pittsburgh and the University of Michigan are two other schools that have benefitted from the influx of grant funding. UPitt recently received a $62.3 million grant from NIH to jumpstart the translational research and investigative methods for implementing new discoveries in patient care, while UM was awarded $55 million to develop multiple programs with the precision medicine initiative.
Tagged Care QualityMedical ResearchPopulation Health ManagementPrecision Medicine


