Chronic disease patients: EHR access outweighs privacy risks

May 07, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 07, 2014 - Patients suffering from chronic diseases like diabetes and asthma believe that the benefits of having access to their EHR data outweigh their concerns about patient privacy, according to a patient engagement survey by Accenture.  More than half of consumers think that EHR access is critical to their care, with higher percentages among those living with cancer than with conditions like arthritis.  Sixty-nine percent even go as far to say that patient data access is a fundamental right that should not be restricted, even though 55% believe they don’t currently have very much control over their own health information.
The poll of more than 2000 consumers found that privacy concerns vary significantly by condition, with 72% of heart disease patients worried about privacy risks compared to 68% of asthma patients and just 61% of diabetics.  Interestingly, patients were more concerned about their financial security in industries like online banking and retail than their personal health information.
When asked about the degree of control a patient has over his or her information, 65% of heart disease patients said they felt like they had “complete or “some” control versus just 49% of COPD patients.  “This information is timely as providers are striving to achieve Meaningful Use Stage 2, where providing access to medical information is a core measure,” the survey notes.
Chronic disease patients accessed their data more frequently than healthier patients, the survey found, with 91% accessing data after being diagnosed with a condition and 87% using online data to help manage their condition, but more than half indicated that they still don’t know how to access their data.  A whopping 17% said they don’t look at their personal health information online because they implicitly trust that their records are accurate.  This number increased to 31% of cancer patients, a surprising figure given the complexity of treatments for the range of diseases.
Dig Deeper
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
Adult Vaccine Project Produces Population Health Best Practices
“The research findings confirm that people – particularly the chronically ill – want access to their medical information,” the poll concludes.  “As consumers increasingly expect medication information to be available online, and as federal legislation supports that trend, it will be interesting to see how the percentage of people access their EHR will shift over time.”
Tagged Coordination of CareHealthcare Data StrategyPatient EngagementPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


