Can online games help docs treat hypertension better?

May 21, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 21, 2014 - Physicians who played an educational game online were able to bring the blood pressure of hypertensive patients under control more quickly than those who didn’t partake in the program, according to research from Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH) in Boston and the VA Healthcare System, published in Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes this week.  By reinforcing clinical training through gamification at regular intervals, researchers were able to increase knowledge retention among participating physicians and reduce the amount of time it took for patients to get their blood pressure under control from 148 days to 142 days.
“This study is the first to show that an online educational game among medical professionals can improve the health measures of their patients,” said Alexander Turchin, MD, MS, director of Informatics Research, BWH Division of Endocrinology, co-lead study author. “Educational games may be effective tools to engage health professionals, boost learning, optimize practice patterns, and improve patient outcomes.”
The year-long trial involved clinicians from the VA system, some of whom played an online quiz developed by B. Price Kerfoot, MD, EdM, a staff surgeon in the Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System who led the study.  Clinicians selected to play the game reviewed 32 validated clinical cases that were followed by multiple choice questions.  The players were emailed a question every three days.  Incorrectly answered questions were re-sent in 12 days, while those answered correctly were sent again in 24 days.  Scores were posted online to encourage competition amongst the group.
The result of the trial was a “modest but significant” reduction in the time it took for physicians to bring hypertension under control.  For every four physicians who participated in the game, ten more patients achieved a target blood pressure. “We hope that future studies continue to focus on figuring out how to most effectively integrate games into the education of health professionals for the benefit of their patients,” Turchin added.
Dig Deeper
Big Data Could Hold Key to Improving Vaccinations Rates
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
“All of Us” Precision Medicine Program Enters Beta Testing
The hypertension challenge is available for free to anyone interested in testing their knowledge of evidence-based treatments, distributed by Harvard-based start-up Qstream.
Tagged Medical ResearchPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


