Are Big Data, Genomics, Precision Medicine the Cure for Cancer?

August 20, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 20, 2015 - A cure for cancer has always been one of the most elusive goals in healthcare, but new big data analytics solutions from a fresh wave of innovators may be bringing clinicians and patients closer than ever to critical breakthroughs in the treatment of this devastating category of diseases. 
Instead of approaching cancer with a one-size-fits-all, firehose methodology, or wiping out healthy systems in pursuit of a smaller number of rouge cells, clinicians and researchers are starting to use detailed genomics and deeply personalized care regimens to harness the emerging power of precision medicine.
Can a precision approach for individuals, coupled with the incredible clout of big data analytics and genomic sequencing, produce the answers to some of medicine’s most intractable problems?
A slew of big-name corporations, including those not usually known for their direct interest in medicine, are trying to prove that the answer is “yes.”  As use cases for big data analytics solidify the value of data as an asset across other industries, companies like IBM, Google, HP, Dell, and Intel are bringing their enterprise expertise in the lucrative territory of healthcare.
“Precision medicine – taking into account individual differences in people’s genes, environments, and lifestyles – is one of the biggest of the big data problems and is on the cusp of a remarkable transformation in medicine,” wrote Eric Dishman, Director of Proactive Health Research at Intel Corporation as the chip maker announced its Collaborative Cancer Cloud this week. 
READ MORE: CancerLinQ Brings Big Data Insights to Oncology with FDA, NCI Partners
Dishman, whose long battle with cancer lends him a personal stake in the precision medicine conversation, called the project “ambitious,” “critical,” and “potentially lifesaving,” highlighting the need for open source, large-scale infrastructure that promotes partnership and personalization across research institutions.
“We view genomics as the first wave of precision medicine, and we’re working with our partners to drive adoption of genomic sequencers, genomic appliances, and cloud-based genomic analytics,” Dishman continued. Intel is partnering with the Knight Cancer Institute at Oregon Health & Science University to develop the platform. 
“With the Collaborative Cancer Cloud, we are combining next generation Intel technologies and bio-science advancements to enable solutions that make it easier, faster, and more affordable for developers, researchers, and clinicians to understand any disease that has a genetic component, starting with cancer.”
Cloud-based research platforms are gaining traction as a viable solution for bringing together disparate research organizations and electronic health record data of millions of patients in a standardized way.  Earlier in 2015, the American Society of Clinical Oncologists announced the launch of CancerLinq, a physician-led initiative founded on SAP’s HANA big data technology. 
The platform hopes to demolish barriers between abstracted research concepts from clinical trial data and actual oncology practice, said Dr. Clifford A. Hudis, MD, FACP, a medical oncologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and past president of ASCO to HealthITAnalytics.com.
READ MORE: Healthy Nevada Study Combines Genomics, Population Health
Randomized clinical trials have their place, Hudis said, but they also have their shortcomings.  “They’re often done in relatively healthy groups of patients,” he explained. “They have cancer of one sort of another, but apart from that they’re healthy. They don’t have diabetes, high blood pressure; they’re not very old; they’re not very young, and so on.”
“Only about 3 percent of people with cancer actually participate in research. Ninety-seven percent of the experiences we get while treating cancer are outside the clinical research setting, and up until now we couldn’t mine any of it. With rare exception, nothing is truly learned from it.”
“If I ask my patients what they think happens with their experience, they all think they’re contributing to our learning,” he said. “Even patients having nothing to do with a clinical trial think their doctors are learning from the experience of treating them. Sadly, that’s never been particularly true. So we hope to change that.”
Understanding how to glean actionable insights from big data has been one of the healthcare system’s major ongoing challenges, especially when researchers face obstacles to accessing enough of the right type of complete, accurate, high-quality data.  Healthcare providers and rulemakers have been tackling the problem for their end by striving to improve EHR interoperability and data integrity at the source of so much valuable information. 
The FDA recently unveiled one of its biggest forays into precision medicine, a cloud-based genomics platform called precisionFDA.  The tool joins other cooperative initiatives from professional societies, academic centers, and health systems in the fight to illuminate the underlying reasons why some patients develop certain cancers, and why others may not respond at all to therapies that produce miraculous results in their peers.
READ MORE: Gates Invests $50M in Big Data, Precision Medicine for Alzheimer’s
But it may be that the commercial research and vendor communities will provide the biggest immediate boost to big data analytics in the oncology sphere.  With solid mounds of cash behind them and huge opportunities for ROI on the horizon, forward-thinking companies like Apple are pinning their hopes on consumer-grade healthcare and the Internet of Things, while Google, never shy when it comes to outlandish propositions, has invested a great deal of funding and effort into idea machines like Flatiron Health.
Flatiron Health, in conjunction with Guardant Health, announced its own entry into the cloud-based cancer research ecosystem this week.  This proprietary platform, which will integrate liquid biopsy genomic testing with big data on treatments and outcomes, hopes to aid life science companies as they try to fill clinical trials and develop new precision medicine strategies.
"Integrating clinical and genomic information has the potential to dramatically improve cancer treatment and advance therapy development," said Nat Turner, co-founder and chief executive officer, Flatiron Health. "Flatiron Health and Guardant Health's collective technology, oncology know-how and genomic expertise will deliver an advanced, cloud-based platform to enhance patient care."
Reducing the time from diagnosis to personalized treatment is a key goal for oncology experts.  As supercomputing power multiples exponentially each year, genomic sequencing becomes a faster and more financial viable process to use more frequently.  The cost of sequencing DNA has dropped from a staggering $100 million to just $1000 since 2001, and the length of time required for the task has also dipped accordingly.
But it may not be moving quickly enough for some of the 1 million patients who receive a cancer diagnosis each year in the United States.  Intel envisions that the healthcare system will be able to provide a genomics-based diagnosis and personalized treatment plan to cancer patients in a mere twenty-four hours by the year 2020 – and the same technologies being developed for oncology could be used for other diseases with a genetic influence, such as autism and diabetes.
This vision will require a concerted effort on the part of vendors, research corporations, academic institutions, and healthcare providers to generate data with a high degree of completeness and integrity that can be useful for this type of complicated big data work.
“In the end, precision medicine will only be as precise as available data allows,” Dishman says. “To better understand complex diseases like cancer, the medical and technology industries must collaborate to make the growing wealth of insights resulting from secure analysis of public and private genetic datasets accessible for the patient’s benefit. And if we do, we can turn an agonizing and uncertain process for the patient into a personalized process that occurs all in one day.”
While a universal cure for cancer may still be some long years away, big data analytics and the new excitement around the potential of precision medicine are helping the healthcare industry make enormous strides towards developing targeted treatments for patients based on their most foundational attributes. 
As the science of genomics continues to advance, and big data analytics continues to yield astonishing insights into patient care, the healthcare industry’s collaborative response to cancer research bodes well for the nation’s ability to tackle this most difficult of diseases.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsMedical ResearchPrecision Medicine


