Yale, Epic Partner to Boost Healthcare with Big Data Analytics

January 26, 2018

By Jessica Kent
January 26, 2018 - Yale New Haven Hospital (YNHH) has announced a partnership with Epic Systems to launch the Capacity Command Center (CCC) that will combine data analytics and the physical co-location of key operational services to enhance patient care.
“Through the CCC, we’re using the enormous amounts of data available from Epic and other sources to improve care, safety and the patient experience,” Ohm Deshpande, MD, Director of Utilization Review and Clinical Redesign at YNHHS, said in a public statement. “The center provides the right information to the right people at the right time, to enable the right actions.”
YNHH leaders view the CCC as the manifestation of their commitment to enhancing all aspects of patient care by leveraging Epic EHR data to generate dashboards that will allow nurses, physicians and administrators to react to changing conditions in real time.
Dig Deeper
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
Turning Healthcare Big Data into Actionable Clinical Intelligence
Big Data Analytics Can Bring Visibility, Value to Healthcare
The center will also allow representatives from all relevant operational areas to practice in one location, which will facilitate easy coordination and ensure the organization is consistently operating at peak levels.
These two components of the CCC have already proved to be positive innovations. The dashboards show a variety of real-time metrics such as bed capacity, delays for procedures and tests, and quality and safety indicators. The dashboards are accessible through Epic for both physicians and staff and increase real-time operational transparency.
The physical co-location of operational services has increased collaborative critical thinking with clinicians able to communicate in real time about how to best provide patients with efficient, quality care.
YNHH and Epic are working to enhance real-time process improvement and promote patient-centeredness in healthcare while identifying and eliminating wasted resources from their operations.
“Yale New Haven Hospital cares for the most complicated patients in our region,” said Richard D’Aquila, president of Yale New Haven Hospital and Yale New Haven Health.
“The Command Center’s people, processes and data infrastructure will allow us to gain unparalleled real-time insight into our operations, keep the patient at the center of all that we do, and enhance our ability to provide the highest value care. This has never been done in such a large and complex medical center in New England,” he concluded.
Tagged Clinical Quality MeasuresEHR Data AnalyticsEHR Data QualityHealthcare Big Data Analytics


