JAMA: Tobacco control has major impact on population health

January 09, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 09, 2014 - Efforts to reduce tobacco use in America have paid off by saving more than 8 million lives since 1964, says an article published this week in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).  Fifty years after the Surgeon General Luther Terry’s Smoking and Health Report, “it is important to honor the extraordinary scientific advances in tobacco control…that have led to countless lives saved,” write Steven A. Schroeder, MD and Howard K. Koh, MD, MPH.  The prevalence of smoking among adults has dropped by 50% over the past half century, declining from a peak of 42.7% in 1964 to 18.1% in 2012.
“Much of this progress stems from the rigorous development of evidence-based tobacco control policies that now serve as a robust foundation for public health action,” the authors say.  Preventative measures and population health services like hotlines helping patients quit smoking, underage purchasing laws, and clean air initiatives banning cigarettes in public places have positively impacted communities and reduced the potential for diseases stemming from second-hand smoke.
While smoking still kills nearly half a million Americans per year, and is a leading cause of lung cancer, stroke, and heart disease, the 1964 report marked the first time the link between these conditions and tobacco use was conclusively proven and began to be accepted by the public.
New challenges are arising in the fight against smoking as e-cigarettes that promise a nicotine fix without the harmful tar and other chemicals of traditional cigarettes gain popularity among youth and adult consumers alike.  Research published in the same JAMA issue warns about the growing acceptance of e-cigarettes and hookahs among high school-aged students, finding that use of these products has doubled over the past year, though the prevalence of young smokers still remains relatively low.
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Kaiser Permanente Program Reduces Cardiovascular Disease Risks
“Nearly 42 million smokers still struggle with this addiction,” Schroeder and Koh write.  “Most (70%) want to quit, but only 3% to 5% annually can do so unaided.  “Meanwhile, the tobacco industry spends more than $8 billion a year in the United States to advertise and market cigarettes and smokeless tobacco, while also promoting newer products including dissolvable tablets and e-cigarettes.  The landscape of tobacco products is ever changing, and public health policies must also evolve to keep pace.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPatient CarePopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


