Pediatric Patient-Reported Outcomes Can Improve Cancer Care

June 21, 2017

By Thomas Beaton
June 21, 2017 - Patient-reported outcomes (PROs) from pediatric cancer patients as young as eight years old can help providers better understand the impacts of their care, according to a new study.
Researchers enrolled children ages 8 to 18 in Phase 1 safety trials or Phase 2 efficacy trials, at cancer settings in Children's National Health System, Seattle Children's Hospital, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, and Boston Children's Hospital.
“When experimental cancer drugs are studied, researchers collect details about how these promising therapies affect children's organs, but rarely do they ask the children themselves about symptoms they feel or the side effects they experience," says Pamela S. Hinds, PhD, RN, Director of Nursing Research and Quality Outcomes at Children's National and lead author of study.
Dig Deeper
Data Integrity Strategies for Patient Matching, Identification
NY Public, Private HIEs Connect for Population Health Management
CDC Works to Improve Public Health Data Analytics, Surveillance
The research teams within these cancer settings then determined if these pediatric patients could effectively express information about their symptoms, quality of life, and other common patient-reported outcomes data.
The findings indicated that these children can reliably characterize the impact of an experimental therapy on their symptoms and quality of life. These children were even able to effectively determine this impact at early stages of cancer development.
Patients could describe "a good day" as having fewer side effects and fewer interruptions to their lives. Conversely, “bad days" were marked by interruptions to their usual activities such as missing time with friends and family due to hospital visits.
The research team believes self-reported patient outcomes could potentially create a new clinical trial endpoint. Pediatric PROs may be able to adequately enhance experimental trials in the oncology space.
"Without this crucial information, the full impact of the experimental treatment on the pediatric patient is likely underreported and clinicians are hobbled in their ability to effectively manage side effects,” Hinds said.
The findings of the report expand upon the usefulness PROs are able to provide in clinical care settings, which may nudge hospitals and providers into using them more often.
While PROs are not always critical to improving clinical quality measures, they do help with patient-centered care by helping providers identify unique patient-by-patient needs. For example, providers can use these reported outcomes along with patient generated data to preemptively detect health issues before they become more serious conditions.
Hinds and the research team also found that the extended benefits of PROs are applicable to pediatric patients with incurable cancers.
"Only by measuring and understanding self-reported symptoms and function in children and adolescents with incurable cancer can we adequately address threats to their quality of life and improve symptom control and supportive care," Hinds and co-authors concluded.
"By giving children a voice in the process, clinicians will be able to better anticipate and manage symptoms and thereby improve life for patients and their families.”
Tagged Patient Generated Health DataPatient OutcomesPatient SatisfactionPopulation Health


