Will ICD-10 impact patient safety reporting, hospital quality?

September 05, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 05, 2014 - The transition to ICD-10 may have a negative impact on patient safety reporting and the subsequent perception of hospital quality, argues a new study in JAMIA this week, by producing erroneous comparisons between the new codes and the current ICD-9 system in AHRQ patient safety indicators (PSIs).  The proposed translations between systems may inadvertently inflate the number of reportable PSIs and make comparisons impossible as the industry moves past the October 1, 2015 implementation date.
“The majority of scholarly communications about the ICD-10-CM transition report roadmaps for immediate software and training needs, while overlooking downstream consequences on the healthcare system,” write Dr. Yves A. Lussier of the University of Arizona and a team of researchers from the University of Illinois. “Specific ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes have reporting requirements to the federal government, which leads to our focus on PSIs. PSI calculations are highly dependent on their subsumed coding system.  To our knowledge, we provide the first comprehensive report of substantial PSI measurement changes introduced by the ICD-10-CM coding system without further guidance from AHRQ.”
While ICD-10 is generally considered the more complex of the code sets, with thousands of added options to increase the detail and specificity of medical coding, the changing structure of the code set has resulted in a number of highly convoluted mapping strategies that don’t always capture the desired information.  The JAMIA study found that just three PSIs had straightforward ICD-10 equivalents, while 15 resulted in convoluted mappings.  Five PSIs had no official mapping through the General Equivalence Mappings (GEMs) for billable diagnosis codes, the authors add.
“In summary, the new ICD-10-CM coding system poses impending risks for: (1) under-reporting safety incidents as previously reported via ICD-9-CM, (2) unwarranted inflation of PSIs due to the increased specification of ICD-10-CM, and (3) increased variability of calculations attributable to abundant alternate ICD-9-CM to ICD-10-CM translations highly susceptible to different interpretations by hospital coding practices,” the study says.  “Improved coding guidelines for reporting PSI using ICD-10-CM codes are required to help hospitals and healthcare systems use ICD-10-CM more efficiently for improved patient care and prevention of patient harm.”
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data StrategyICD-10Patient Safety


