PA Partners Will Use EHR Data Analytics to Improve Care Quality

December 23, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Johns Hopkins and Allegheny Health Network will leverage EHR data analytics and clinical trials to improve cancer care.
December 23, 2014 - An expanded collaboration between Allegheny Health Network, Highmark Health, and Johns Hopkins Medicine will focus on using EHR data analytics, care coordination, and shared research resources to improve care quality and ensure patient safety, the organizations announced this week.  Building on a previously established five-year research partnership to raise the quality of oncology care, the new agreement will extend the alliance of healthcare providers and provide additional opportunities for lowering costs and improving outcomes.
“In this ever-changing health care environment, the goal is to provide better care for better value for patients, caregivers and payers,” says Brian Gragnolati, senior vice president of the Johns Hopkins Health System. “It makes sense to find synergies with other entities with similar missions and different strengths.”
The partnership is intended to complement a July agreement between Johns Hopkins and Allegheny Health Network to exchange clinical skills, education, and patient support services in pursuit of innovative treatments and better quality of care for cancer patients.  Both Allegheny Health and Johns Hopkins are renowned for their cancer treatment and discovery centers.  The Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center is recognized by the National Cancer Institute as a comprehensive cancer care center, while Allegheny boasts the nation’s largest radiation oncology network accredited by the American Society for Radiation Oncology and American College of Radiology.
Under the additional arrangement announced this week, clinicians and researchers will continue to leverage EHR data and other data resources at the Johns Hopkins’ Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality to perform advanced clinical analytics that will help to identify opportunities for improvements to patient safety, quality, and outcomes.  The partnership will also work to increase affordable care access for patients in Pennsylvania while bringing knowledge and expertise into the community.
Dig Deeper
Cancer Mortality Rates See 20% Drop, but Disparities Remain
VA Precision Medicine Databank Hits 500,000 Participants
Precision Medicine, Blue Button Among White House Big Data Efforts
“This truly is a unique opportunity for our organization to more closely collaborate with one of the world’s most accomplished and respected health care institutions so we can enhance the scope and capabilities of the services we offer to the western Pennsylvania region,” says Tony Farah, MD, Allegheny Health Network’s chief medical officer. “It demonstrates clearly to all of our patients and the community that Allegheny Heath Network and Highmark Health are committed to meeting their health care needs and to helping advance the future of medicine both locally and nationally in innovative and meaningful ways.”
“The very same spirit of collaboration in the pursuit of excellence that defines the culture of caring at Allegheny Health Network is what compels us to partner with pioneering institutions like Johns Hopkins to further advance medicine,” says John Paul, Allegheny Health Network president and chief executive officer. “We are excited about the opportunities this new relationship will afford us.”
Tagged EHR Data AnalyticsMedical ResearchQuality Of Care


