Should Population Health Management Participation Be Mandatory?

December 02, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Will a mandatory state population health management program in Maryland improve health for its employees?
December 02, 2014 - Starting January 1, 2015, state employees in Maryland will be required to participate in a population health management and wellness program or face financial penalties related to healthcare services, say local news outlets.  Patients who receive state-provided health insurance will initially face a $50 annual penalty if they do not participate in certain wellness, fitness, or chronic disease management programs intended to reduce healthcare spending, and the penalties could increase to $450 per year by 2017.
The program, which begins January 1, 2015, is anticipated to cut the state’s spending on healthcare by $4 billion over the next ten years.  Employees will be required to choose a primary care provider, take a health and lifestyle risk assessment, and complete a series of healthy activities to avoid the escalating surcharge.  Patients who do participate in the program will avoid the surcharge and will also receive financial incentives, such as waived copays.
The major focus of the program is chronic disease management, according to a fact sheet released by the Department of Budget and Management.  “One goal of the wellness program is avoiding acute care costs resulting from poorly managed chronic conditions. By providing tools for our participants to use to better manage their health, we keep costs down and improve the sustainability of the Program,” the document says.  “Our wellness program is designed to help our participants understand their current health status and provide simple, affordable ways to either stay healthy or work to become healthier, keeping costs down for both the State and its participants.”
The changes will affect more than 250,000 patients, including the spouses of state employees who are covered by the health plan.  While the program requirements in 2015 are limited to finding a PCP and completing the risk assessment, patients will be asked to adhere to an increasingly intense series of tasks in the coming years, including undergoing screenings such as mammograms and colonoscopies and finding a weight management or nutrition coach.  Patients will not be given specific BMI targets, weight loss amounts, or smoking cessation goals in order to be marked as compliant.  They only have to complete the courses that encourage results.
Dig Deeper
Population Health, Big Data Strategies Could Reduce $2B Waste
Population Health Tool Using EHR Data Reduces HIV Impact in MA
Machine Learning Offers Timely Predictive Analytics for AKI
Better population health management may help the state to spend money, but the mandatory aspect of the program is ruffling more than a few feathers.  “A lot of people object to forcibly having to do this,” said Dale Anderson, Director of Human Resources at the University of Maryland to The Diamondback, a student-run newspaper. “No one likes to be told how they are going to manage their own medical issues. It sort of comes off as the state is interceding in that.”
Other concerns include the fact that the questions on the risk assessment have not been made public, and that patients who do not speak English as a first language may have a hard time understanding and participating in the program.  Low-income patients may also be disproportionately impacted by the financial penalties, which will not operate on an income-adjusted sliding scale.
Does the state have the right idea by making participation in healthy lifestyle activities a condition of benefiting fully from the health insurance it provides?  Will Maryland be able to achieve significant cost savings through their effort?  Will state employees actually enjoy better long-term health?  At the moment, the program may raise more questions than it can answer, but it will be interesting to see how the plan tracks metrics that measure health status improvements and savings as the initial phases of the program begin in the new year.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


