EHR analytics, financial reform will change pharmacy practice

December 11, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 11, 2013 - Pharmacy professionals will have some extra tools in the pockets of their lab coats over the next few years as analytics and improved EHR technology make the process of ordering, verifying, and distributing medications easier and more streamlined.  ASHP’s “Pharmacy Forecast 2014 – 2018” predicts that many functions involved in detecting adverse events will be automated over the next five years, and that EHR analytics will provide decision support for pharmacists to help them pick the most effective interventions.
A survey of 164 pharmacy experts shows that despite the financial pressures involved in healthcare reform and the Affordable Care Act, hospitals will still invest in analytics infrastructure to aid medication management.  The majority of pharmacists believe that at least a quarter of hospitals will apply analytics to automated real-time continuous medication use evaluation (C-MUE) of patient outcomes, while at least half of hospitals will automatically detect adverse drug events and provide notifications to the care team that intervention is needed.
Nearly 80% of respondents believe it’s “somewhat likely” or “very likely” that hospitals will analyze EHR data routinely to develop patient protocols and treatment guidelines, and all computer applications will connect to a single drug information database to ensure consistency in the use of drug products across all systems.  These projects call for a sharp focus on data integrity in order to develop and apply standardized data directly to patient care, the participants note.
These increased analytics capabilities will develop jointly with significant payment reforms, the pharmacists predict.  Just like physicians, pharmacists will be held financially accountable for performance improvement measures in hospitals, and must make extra effort to ensure medication management post-discharge.  More than half of the survey participants believe that this will involve greater contact with corporate entities like retail pharmacy chains to boost adherence of patients who have gone home.
Dig Deeper
Can Healthcare Avoid “Black Box” Artificial Intelligence Tools?
EHR Sample Size Matters in Machine Learning, Predictive Analytics
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Ninety percent of pharmacists agree that at least half of hospital revenue will come from pay-for-performance initiatives by 2018, and a similar number anticipate bundled payments making their mark on hospital revenues.  These changes will lead pharmacists to become a more integral part of a patient’s care team, two-thirds of respondents predict.  Pharmacists will spend more time actively involved with handling medication management issues instead of just preparing and distributing drug products.
“Pharmacists need to participate in programs that tie fixed reimbursement to high-quality outcomes, particularly outside the acute-care environment,” said Lee C. Vermeulen, BS Pharm, MS, FCCP, director of the Center for Clinical Knowledge Management, UW Health, and clinical professor, University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Pharmacy. “Learning to live with lower reimbursement rates will position those organizations well for the future, when most care is not reimbursed in a piecemeal fashion.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsHealth Data ManagementHealthcare Analytics


