ONC Restructures Health IT Standards Committee into Task Forces

May 22, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 22, 2015 - The Office of the National Coordinator is gearing up for change as the six-year-old Health IT Standards Committee (HITSC) moves into a cycle of membership renewal and restructuring, write Jon White, MD, Acting Deputy National Coordinator and Steven Posnack, MS, MHS, Director of the Office of Standards and Technology in a blog post on Health IT Buzz. 
As the HITSC sees an influx of new blood this year, the ONC will shift the committee’s work towards smaller, more dedicated task forces to address pressing concerns with health data interoperability, EHR adoption, clinical analytics, and more.
“In light of recent experiences, we believe that an HITSC with targeted, time-limited task forces will be a better way to get the expert and public feedback we need,” White and Posnack said.  “This approach also provides task force members with clear and finite time commitments to study an issue with more specificity on the scope and nature of a task force’s work.”
“Additionally, because task forces will be created for a set time period and will be convened for specific issues, we expect the task force structure will allow for greater participation from a diverse mix of stakeholders and a wider range of perspectives,” they continued. “This operational change to a more nimble and adaptable structure will also help improve the representative focus that we always strive to achieve.”
Dig Deeper
Semantic Computing, Predictive Analytics Need Reliable Metadata
AMIA: Health Informatics Can Help Overcome the Big Data “Deluge”
CIOs: FHIR Has Potential, Blockchain Overhyped in Healthcare
The restructuring isn’t the only adjustment that the ONC is facing in the coming months.  National Coordinator Dr. Karen DeSalvo has been nominated to become the Assistant Secretary for Health at the Department of Health and Human Services.  If confirmed, the top seat at the ONC would be vacant again, requiring new leadership to steer the HITSC and its new workgroups as they attempt to address the healthcare industry’s challenges with health IT adoption.
“Current standing workgroups will continue their work for the full committee through June and then sunset. Beginning in July, the HITSC will be asked to form a task force to take on specific topics on which ONC seeks advice,” White and Posnack explain. 
“We appreciate the hard work and commitment that HITSC and workgroup members put in month after month and look forward to the return of many of the existing members into the new task forces. Working together will help us all achieve an interoperable learning health system.”
Healthcare stakeholders interested in serving on one of the new task forces may submit their applications for consideration here.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealthcare Data GovernanceInteroperability


