VA Enlists Watson for Big Data Analytics, Decision Support

December 29, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 29, 2014 - IBM’s supercomputer will have a chance to stretch its muscles at the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) thanks to a new multi-million dollar contract to improve clinical decision support for veterans with PTSD.  Watson, perhaps most famous for routing human contestants on the quiz show Jeopardy!, has been moving steadily towards more sophisticated work with big data analytics in the healthcare sphere as IBM turns its computing power into analytics-as-a-service products.
“Physicians can save valuable time finding the right information needed to care for their patients with this sophisticated and advanced technology,” said Carolyn M. Clancy, VA’s interim undersecretary for health, in a statement. “A tool that can help a clinician quickly collect, combine and present information will allow them to spend more time listening and interacting with the veteran.”
“We always believed that healthcare intelligence is one area that is perfectly suited for these cognitive capabilities,” said Andy Maner, Managing Partner of US Federal at IBM’s Global Business Services sector.  “We’ve very excited about what we are doing for the VA because PTSD and mental healthcare is one of the foremost challenges that they face, and that’s where we like to be.  We don’t think Watson should be put over in the corner.  We think it should be always solving the most difficult, challenging, complex problems.”
Healthcare seems well suited to Watson’s unique talents, which blend the ability to ingest vast quantities of data with sophisticated machine learning to produce a number of possible outcomes and their associated confidence intervals based on the information at hand.  This allows physicians to use their own cognitive skills, paired with experience and training, to select the most reasonable option in a quick, precise, and evidence-based manner.
Dig Deeper
Google, Stanford Partner for Genomics, Precision Medicine Project
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
Tech Giants Give Healthcare Artificial Intelligence Start-Ups a Boost
“You’re essentially teaching the system,” Maner explained to HealthITAnalytics, by feeding Watson big data from EHRs, medical journals, studies, lab results, and other patient information.  “It’s taking it all in.  And then the output, using these confidence intervals, still allows the doctor to be the doctor, and Watson gets to be this incredibly thoughtful decision supporter or decision creation tool.  The user is seeing possibilities, or best-in-class answers.  It’s giving you options to consider, as opposed to requiring a clinician to go to every medical journal, every diagnosis, and every possible everything.  It’s just incredibly powerful.”
Watson has been delving into healthcare analytics for several years, and has formed some notable partnerships with organizations like the Cleveland Clinic, Mayo Clinic, MD Anderson Cancer Center, and EHR developer Epic Systems.  The VA contract, which is slated to last two years and is valued at up to $16 million, will use Watson’s natural language processing capabilities to allow clinicians to tackle PTSD, which impacts up to 20% of veterans from the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan as well as up to 15% of Gulf War and Vietnam veterans.
While the current VA pilot is somewhat short-term and small in scope, IBM has high hopes for Watson as a government employee.  The supercomputer is an important part of Big Blue’s bid to renovate the Department of Defense’s aging health IT infrastructure, and its applications for the vast and complex VA healthcare system may go far beyond the challenges of PTSD.
“This particular contract is pretty limited in what it wants to do and in a very quick timeframe, and we are perfectly comfortable signing up for that,” Maner said.  “We know that once you see it, you’re going to want to introduce different types of projects that will improve the quality of care. So yes, this is fairly limited, but this is exactly how they should start.  They should make Watson prove itself, and we definitely believe it will.”
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsClinical Intelligence


