How Clinical Analytics, EHRs Produce 90% Hypertension Control

May 15, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 15, 2015 - The population health management programs within the Kaiser Permanente healthcare system are famous for achieving significant results, and the Hypertension Program Improvement Process, which has helped close to 90 percent of patients in the network gain control over their blood pressure, is no exception. 
Using clinical analytics and leveraging the EHR as a primary tool for tracking at risk-patients and prompting clinicians to provide chronic disease management services, Kaiser Permanente providers have nearly doubled the national average for hypertension control and exceeded the 70 percent benchmark set by the CDC’s Million Hearts initiative.
Already a frequent flyer on the Million Hearts Hypertension Champions list and highly ranked by the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS) score system, Kaiser Permanente’s integrated EHR system and reliance on clinical analytics helps providers to work effectively within the organization’s team-based care framework. 
A combination of population health management activities and health IT-based tools helps clinicians target high risk patients, reduce health disparities, and ensure that patients remain adherent to their medications. 
Dig Deeper
NIH Calls for “All of Us” Population Health Research Proposals
Artificial Intelligence Helps with Costs, Clinical Care at HIMSS18
Precision Medicine Aids 20% Drop in Pediatric Cancer Deaths
Specific chronic disease management activities within the program include:
• Making blood pressure checks, conducted by medical assistants, available to patients on a walk-in basis
• Using a comprehensive patient registry to identify patients with uncontrolled or poorly controlled hypertension who may benefit from adding medication therapy or making lifestyle changes to reduce blood pressure
• Utilizing a clinical analytics algorithm to identify the most appropriate combination of drug treatments, improving adherence among providers and patients
• Providing medication adherence reminder calls for patients who are due for refills or demonstrate poor compliance with recommended treatments
"This successful program is evidence that a thoughtful team-based approach improves blood pressure control," said Dr. Joseph Young, the Northern California and National Hypertension Lead for Kaiser Permanente. "High blood pressure is an important modifiable risk factor for heart disease, stroke and kidney disease. High blood pressure affects 29 percent of adults in the Unites States, so this work is of paramount importance."
A 2013 Kaiser Permanente study, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), further illustrates how the healthcare system was able to achieve dramatic increases in hypertension control over a relatively short time period.  After establishing the Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC) hypertension registry in 2001, the system was able to increase hypertension control from 43.6 percent to 80.4 percent by 2009.  At the same time that the KPNC study ended, the national average for hypertension control lagged significantly at 64.1 percent.
Patients were identified for inclusion in the hypertension registry using diagnostic codes, pharmacy data, stroke-related hospitalizations, or a history of risk factors including coronary disease, heart failure, or diabetes.  Providers then used an evidence-based, step-by-step population health management framework to improve hypertension control, including follow-up visits with medical assistants to monitor blood pressure readings, the dissemination of performance metrics to benchmark provider effectiveness, and the promotion of single-pill combination therapy to improve adherence.
Kaiser Permanente is also working to reduce racial disparities in hypertension control, specifically among the Medicare-aged population.  With the help of the American Heart Association and a $2.55 million grant awarded in 2014, Kaiser Permanente providers are working to share their knowledge of population health management among minority patients by developing a hypertension control model that can be applied in multiple types of primary care settings.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


