Intermountain Launches Prospective Precision Medicine Study

April 19, 2018

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 19, 2018 - Intermountain Healthcare is launching a new precision medicine project that will allow researchers to take a prospective view on the potential of genomic data.
The PRECISE study allows for the collection of fresh-frozen tissue and blood specimens that will be held for future research projects, creating an easily accessible cache of genomic data that is not limited to use for answering a single scientific question.
“PRECISE is a prospective, general tissue-collection protocol,” explained Bryce Moulton, Clinical Research Director for Precision Genomics at Intermountain Healthcare.  “PRECISE allows us to create a diverse biobank of varied sample types that will serve as a hypothesis-generating resource for future precision health initiatives, and transcends all medical disciplines.” 
Dig Deeper
FHIR Can Move Genomics from Prediction to Precision Medicine
VA Precision Medicine Databank Hits 500,000 Participants
How Precision Medicine Will Shift from Research to Clinical Care
“PRECISE is the instrument that allows researchers to investigate more efficiently, apply new technology and increase analytic capabilities that only fresh-frozen tissue can provide.”
Tissue samples will be collected from patients across the Intermountain Healthcare system, which serves patients in Utah, Idaho, and adjacent regions. 
Instead of storing the samples in traditional Formalin-fixed Paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks, the specimens will be frozen.  Intermountain currently holds approximately four million shelf-stable FFPE blocks within its BioRepository, but researchers believe that access to fresh-frozen materials will create a more accessible pool of data for a variety of applications. 
“For genomic analysis, where we are looking at DNA, we find that FFPE sometimes proves difficult,” he said. “A superior method is fresh-frozen, stored in a minus 80-degree freezer," said Moulton. "With fresh-frozen samples, we are able to preserve and better analyze DNA, RNA and other cellular components that researches may not otherwise have access.”
Analysis of these tissues will take place at the Translational Science Center (TSC) in St. George, Utah, which has the capacity to sequence thousands of genomes per year.
The Translational Science Center was created at the beginning of 2017 to accelerate the sequencing of genetic information from the health system’s BioRepository biobank.   
“There are not too many organizations with the pioneering mind frame of Intermountain; including the critical mass of physicians, investigators, precious samples (with longitudinal medical record) and all the infrastructure to support such a unique genomics initiative,” said Helaman Escobar, Director of Translational Science & Research, at the time.
“We are poised to do something of tremendous impact. It’s very exciting to be part of this from its inception.”
The TSC contains a number of high-throughput next-generation sequencing instruments that allow for large-scale whole genome sequencing.
“Through the robust patient populations and resources at Intermountain, PRECISE will provide new opportunities to address a diverse range of research questions and expedite the research process in a consistent and efficient manner,” said Tyler Barker, PhD, the Principle Investigator for the PRECISE Study at Intermountain Healthcare.
Genomic data from the PRECISE collection will be linked to clinical outcomes in order to inform personalized treatments for cancer patients and other individuals with conditions that have strong genetic components.
“The multi-disciplinary nature and prospective design of PRECISE will be a challenge and require a tremendous amount of teamwork,” added Barker, “but in the end, the pragmatic results will advance our knowledge regarding precision health and medicine initiatives.”
Tagged Genetic testingGenomicsMedical ResearchPersonalized MedicinePrecision Medicine


