How HIEs Contribute to Clinical Analytics, Population Health

November 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Health information exchanges are becoming increasingly important for population health management and clinical analytics in an era of interoperability.
November 03, 2014 - With the tight focus on EHR interoperability and data sharing among partners along the healthcare continuum, both public and private health information exchanges (HIEs) are enjoying a moment in the limelight.  Private HIEs are growing in popularity among former competitors in local communities, and many statewide organizations have achieved financial sustainability, and are now beginning to expand their services to include clinical analytics and population health management features.  HIEs may now be a fact of life, but are they necessary for truly effective analytics?  How should analytics-minded providers choose to invest their time, money and infrastructure when it comes to data exchange?
As with most other health IT initiatives, healthcare organizations must clarify their goals and objectives before deciding to participate in an HIE structure.  Providers who wish to focus on local care coordination, or those who struggle with patient behaviors such as high emergency room use or doctor shopping for controlled substances, may choose to begin with a local, private HIE that will connect them with other providers within the community.  Those with a mind towards large-scale population health management, public health reporting, clinical research involving large pools of EHR or claims data, or harnessing big data for predictive analytics will likely want to participate in a statewide HIE with agreements around both sending and receiving information.
“The biggest use case is patients, maybe even new patients, coming into a system for the first time and there is limited information about a patient’s medical history so that you’re not starting from scratch with that patient and having more of a robust understanding the second that they walk through the door,” explained Morgan Honea, Executive Director of the Colorado Regional Health Information Exchange (CORHIO). “Much of it is a post-discharge view into patient summaries when they show up at the ambulatory practice. Our ER docs use it extensively to make sure that their clinical decisions are informed as much as possible.”
“The ability to gather information that has already been performed on the patient and/or to share that information back with the community where they will go for their continuity of care is very important for us,” said Baylor College of Medicine CMIO Jeffrey Steinbauer, MD, who chose to sign on with the Greater Houston Health Connect in Texas. “We see a terrific opportunity to both increase the quality of care through better coordination and communication among providers and potentially reduce the cost of care if we are able to access all the tests and evaluation done on the patients prior to the time they come to see us.”
Aside from providing more opportunities around care coordination, some HIEs are offering “analytics as a service,” which can help cash-strapped providers participate in the world of population health management without needing to spend exorbitantly on setting up their own complete infrastructure.  In Maine, the addition of clinical analytics capabilities contributed to a 150% increase in provider usage of the state’s HealthInfoNet.
READ MORE: Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
“At the end of the day, the database is the true asset for the exchange,” said HealthInfoNet CEO Dev Culver.  “While the act of exchanging data for treatment is very important, it’s the database that truly is the real asset. We’ve been evaluating strategies for how we actually begin to leverage the data into the aggregated form so it could be used to support situations like looking for what’s going to happen to a patient or looking at patterns and trends in populations.  I think for any HIE, that needs to be central to their strategic plan.”
In California, Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield of California are pooling more than 9 million patient records in an effort to build an HIE platform that any provider can add to. “Although Blue Shield and Anthem Blue Cross are fierce market competitors, in order to create the scale Cal INDEX needs, we knew we needed to work together,” said Paul Markovich, President and Chief Executive Officer of Blue Shield of California.
Smaller HIE organizations, including those that connect multiple care locations within a single system, can also be a highly effective way to invest in population health management, meet the data exchange and secure messaging requirements of Stage 2 meaningful use, and improve communication between providers while going beyond the capabilities of a standard, localized data warehouse.
“Unlike many systems, we don’t have a large employee physician base.  We have about 700 physicians, most of whom are in smaller solo practices, who have no way of really sharing data with us to create a data warehouse,” said Chief Strategy Officer Martin Kleinbart at Citrus Valley Health Partners (CVHP) in California.  “If we had created a data warehouse, all we would be looking at is our hospital Meditech data.  We can already analyze that.  We felt it was important for us to link everyone together and allow physicians to have easier access to hospital data, as well as be able to see all of the stuff that’s in the community.  So we thought that an HIE was an important first step.”
HIE participation may be the best way to get the most data for the least overall cost.  While data sharing agreements and subscription fees might be difficult to hammer out on occasion, as some organizations resist the notion that sharing data assets can actually be instrumental in improving the healthcare system for their partners and for themselves, the HIE landscape has made significant strides in the past ten years or so.
READ MORE: Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
“It is becoming increasingly rare to encounter a provider that doesn’t see the need for HIE on some level,” noted a California HealthCare Foundation report on the state of health information exchange, “and who isn’t already thinking about HIE requirements both strategically and tactically.  There is little denying that the combination of government initiatives and market forces is propelling the nation forward to a time when the creation, sharing, and use of electronic health information to improve healthcare decision making and management will be commonplace.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsHealth Information ExchangeHealthcare Data StrategyPopulation Health Management


