Using the EHR to dive into data mining, clinical analytics

September 17, 2014

By Sponsored Content
September 17, 2014 - In the first post of this series, we introduced the power of electronic health record (EHR) data and how it can completely transform a health system’s view on operations and quality. Moving forward, we’ll dive into how to make this happen through deep-dive data integration to power the next-generation of healthcare analytics.
Most healthcare analytics platforms rely heavily on claims data, which is highly structured but lacks the context afforded by EHR clinical data. When such analytics systems rely on clinical data, they usually depend on vendor-supplied integration messages, such as the Continuity of Care Document, or CCD. While specifications like CCD offer a compact and convenient way to exchange information between for explicit purposes, they also impose limitations through both design and implementation that make them insufficient for population health and performance analytics.
Arcadia recently had the opportunity to explore the nature of these limitations in collaboration with Beth Israel Deaconess Care Organization. The results of that project, published in the Spring 2014 edition of the Journal of Health Information Management, identified a number of points at which the CCD definition, itself can be a primary inhibitor of information exchange, rather than facilitator. A related survey of structured EHR documents (C-CDA) documents supplied by 21 different EHR platforms found over 615 errors between them. While C-CDA and other documents based on the HL7 standard formats solve some point-to-point interoperability problems, they are not yet able to consistently catalog the long history of health interactions typically documented in EHR systems that widely differ in architecture and capability.
Rather than relying on vendor-supplied CCDs, mining data directly from EHR tables allows for improved processes that best support the business intelligence and performance management necessary for health systems.  Robust EHR integration captures the full set of vitals, lab orders, notes, observations, diagnoses and other attributes that need to be analyzed to support initiatives like meaningful use, Patient Centered-Medical Home, accountable care and other initiatives that require requiring advanced reporting.
READ MORE: Business Intelligence Tools Bring Insights to Organ Donation Network
Inside the EHR
When it comes to EHRs, it is all about the little differences. Every EHR system, especially in the ambulatory space, recreates numerous common workflows that a care team performs during a visit. These workflows may include logging the patient’s appointment, to recording the provider’s observation and notes, to tracking the procedures and charges that, in addition to the consultation, will be billed to the patient or payer.
But it’s the little differences that count. Which fields are free text? Which are checklists? Which are picklists? What’s customized? What’s a favorite? These questions all lead to vast differences in the suitability of data for performance measurement. A CCD may only be mapped to a single template, leaving out other critical areas where information may be stored. By mapping to all known variations with in the EHR, performance measurement is more accurate and users gain more trust in their data.
To illustrate the challenge of EHR integration, we dug into one seemingly simple process: the assessment of a patient’s smoking status and the associated documentation of smoking cessation. In other words, in how many different ways does this EHR system document someone as a smoker? Using this as an example, you can best understand the complexities involved with data extraction.
We are not using Natural Language Processing or scanning through long note fields. These are selections made using drop-downs, checkboxes, or pick-lists in the EHR. In other words, they are all structured fields.
READ MORE: Desire for Predictive Analytics Outpaces Hospital Investment
This is what we found:
This process reveals how to best approach the challenge of integration. Some variations of smoking status documentation were mundane: “Current Heavy Tobacco User”, “Current Heavy Cigarette Smoker,” “Former Heavy Cigarette Smoker,” or simply “Heavy Cigarette Smoker.”
Others seemed to create more questions than answers: “Not Smoking a Pipe,” “Not a Current Light Tobacco Smoker,” or “Having Recently Stopped Smoking.” Again, these were not creative free-text notations: all of these variations are available for selection or attachment to the record from an EHR prompt.
Given the extensive variations in patient data, it is critical to develop a reference library of mappings, code-sets, and translations that identify structured and unstructured elements for every connected system. The reference library can use standardized code sets, such as LOINC, CPT, RxNorm/NDC that constitute the most structured form of documentation.  But as shown, these code sets alone cannot fill the wide range of mappings and vendor references necessary. The reference library should be augmented to include custom user interface components and order sets that support a health system’s analytic requirements.
READ MORE: Top Healthcare Business Intelligence Companies by Hospital Users
Ensuring that all practicable areas of documentation are sourced should be the driving force for the architecture behind your healthcare organizations’ EHR abstraction and integration.
Under the Hood
Health systems that are expanding and acquiring new practices rapidly need an integration platform that drives scalability across a range of technical maturity. A model that is adaptable to integrate with a $10 million data center or a server secured in the closet of a two provider primary care clinic. The capabilities and volume of data present complex challenges but any integration model should emphasize the following features.
• Security:  Look for a platform that incorporates the latest in encryption and data protection. Data should be encrypted both at rest and in transit. Furthermore, a system that allows integration without needing clients to open special firewall or tunnels in their networks is critical.
• Scale: Cloud hosted configuration allows for updated mappings for specific clients or across entire integration libraries covering over 20 EHRs across multiple versions for each.
• Trust: Monitoring and surveillance to know that the integration can be a trusted source beyond the implementation.
The amount of visibility into this process is critical, and considerable. The following graph depicts the insertion of reported labs during a data warehouse implementation:
The rise in activity is due to the phased rollout of the integration. Proper surveillance allows for the identification of problems in integration in near real time.  The large drop that occurred from December 24 to January 4 can be explained by holiday closures, but it could also indicate a new version of the EHR deployed over New Year downtime. Tools like this help maintain the integrity of the integrated system moving forward.
As you can see, visibility and reliability are as crucial to meaningful analytic insights into your organization, as they are essential to a powerful, configurable, and effective integration platform. Understanding the wealth of data in an EHR system, properly mapping the information and concepts, and managing the technical complexity of the ETL process are essential to successful integration of your data assets.
Luke Shulman is Principle Consultant at Arcadia Healthcare Solutions.
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataClinical AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


