Medicaid Raises Wellbeing, But Not Chronic Disease Management

December 18, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
The value of Medicaid might not lie in chronic disease management, but the program can raise other quality of life and health factors.
December 18, 2014 - Patients with Medicaid coverage may not be much better off in the chronic disease management or physical health arenas, but they do report better quality of life, better mental health, and more access to preventative screenings, finds a controversial study from Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health.  Quality-life year gains of approximately $62,000 per Medicaid patient were not matched by improvements in high cholesterol, hypertension, or blood sugar control, but researchers still label the insurance coverage as an “excellent” investment in population health management and public health.
The study, published in the American Journal of Public Health, details the outcomes of a Medicaid experiment in Oregon.  In 2008, ten thousand patients from a pool of thirty thousand Medicaid-eligible residents were selected to receive Medicaid care.  Using a data analytics engine that examined information from patient surveys and biomarker data, the study found that Medicaid coverage improved financial security, decreased the incidence of depression, raised self-rated health levels, and encouraged access to preventative care and screenings.  The coverage did not, however, improve common indicators of chronic diseases such as high blood pressure and poorly controlled blood glucose.
For these reasons, the study prompted Medicaid opponents to call for the discontinuation of the program, while advocates pointed out the benefits that the research did produce.  The small size of the study also raised questions about the validity of the results.  “Both ways of thinking are correct,” said Peter Muennig, MD, MPH, Associate Professor of Health Policy and Management at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health and first author of the study. “While the arguments of Medicaid proponents and opponents are plausible and the concerns about sample size are justified, we found that the benefits to mental health and fiscal protections are meaningful enough to justify further expansion of Medicaid.”
Medicaid enrollment and expansion has become a hot-button political issue in the wake of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), and has come under fire as a program rife with fraud, waste, and mismanagement.  However, as population health management becomes a more central goal to the healthcare system, it has become more important to the financial health of provider organizations to ensure that low-income and underserved patients have access to primary care and preventative services that reduce spending down the line.
Dig Deeper
SC Online Population Health Dashboard Reveals Community Disparities
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
Other data derived from the same Oregon project found that Medicaid increased hospital admissions by 30 percent and raised the likelihood of receiving outpatient care by 35 percent.  Medicaid coverage also decreased the probability of having an unpaid medical bill sent to a collections agency by one-quarter, which is beneficial for both patients and providers seeking to stabilize their revenue cycle.  Patients were half as likely to need to borrow money or default on other bills to pay for a catastrophic medical event when they were covered by insurance.
While patients selected for the Medicaid experiment did increase emergency room use for urgent and non-urgent cases, the data did not show how many of those patients had established relationships with primary care providers.  A separate pilot involving Medicaid populations, conducted by CareOregon, found that leveraging data analytics to stratify patients by risk and improve primary care relationships helped to raise HEDIS scores, improve medication adherence, and allowed patients to communicate better with their providers.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


