Is a Public Health Emergency Enough to Combat the Opioid Crisis?

October 27, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 27, 2017 - The opioid crisis is now an official public health emergency, the White House announced this week, recognizing the incredible toll of illegal drugs and prescription painkillers on the American population.
With more than 300,000 opioid-related deaths since the year 2000, the declaration acknowledges that new approaches to substance abuse prevention and treatment are required to address the staggering impact of drug misuse.
"This epidemic is a national health emergency," President Trump said when announcing the action. "Nobody has seen anything like what is going on now. As Americans, we cannot allow this to continue. It is time to liberate our communities from this scourge of drug addiction."
The emergency declaration will ease certain industry regulations and open up some new options for providers to deliver preventive care and rehabilitation services to patients.
Telemedicine providers will have fewer restrictions on prescribing treatment remotely, which may help increase care access for individuals in rural areas.  HHS will be given more latitude to hire specialists that can help to design and implement drug treatment initiatives.  And the Department of Labor will be allowed to issue grants to workers who have been displaced from the workforce due to opioid-related circumstances.
READ MORE: For Opioids and Substance Abuse, Big Data Analytics Is Just the Beginning
“Today’s announcement will expand access to services that fight substance abuse and direct greater resources to treatment,” said Republican National Committee Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel. “Now we need a continued, united effort to combat opioid addiction in communities across the country to help end this crisis once and for all.”
The Administration also announced plans to improve training programs for federally employed prescribers to reduce unnecessary opioid prescriptions, as well as enhanced efforts to prevent the influx of fentanyl from foreign sources.
The government may also allow states to suspend regulations that prevent Medicaid from paying for drug treatment in inpatient facilities with more than 16 beds.
While these actions are a step in the right direction, the public health emergency declaration actually falls short of what the federal government is empowered to do.  
Trump initially teased the declaration of a “national emergency” under the Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, which would have allowed stakeholders to tap into federal funds to confront the internal and external causes of the epidemic. 
READ MORE: Addressing Opioid Abuse with Analytics, Population Health Strategies
That move was recommended earlier this year by the President’s Commission on Combating Drug Addiction and the Opioid Crisis. 
As it stands, the public health emergency announcement, which is only applicable for 90 days, is a slightly different approach.  The format does not offer any new concrete funding opportunities for federal agencies to tackle the crisis. 
HHS and other departments will be directed to shift portions of their existing budgets towards fighting the epidemic, officials noted, but the lack of new funds may hamstring their responses to the complex and wide-ranging problem.
Staffers have suggested that the White House would request money from Congress by the end of the year, the New York Times says, but no firm plans have been unveiled and no figure has been supplied.
The White House announcement instead appears to claims credit for distributing some of the funding allocated for the opioid epidemic under the 21st Century Cures Act, which was passed in 2016 and signed by President Barack Obama at the end of his term.
READ MORE: Communities Tackle Opioid Abuse with EHRs, Population Health
Some government officials and healthcare stakeholders offered praise of the declaration as it stands, but urged the Administration to take additional actions if it wishes to truly make a lasting impact on the epidemic.
“Ending the epidemic will require physicians, insurers, drug manufacturers, and the government to follow through with resources, evidence-based treatment plans and smart public policies at the national and state levels,” said Patrice A. Harris, MD, chair of the AMA Opioid Task Force.
“The number of prescription opioids in the country is declining while the numbers of people dying from heroin and illicit fentanyl are increasing at a staggering rate,” she said. “As it stands, it’s easier for patients to access heroin than to access evidence-based treatment and non-opioid pain care.”
Blair Childs, Senior VP of Public Affairs at hospital and provider alliance Premier Inc., also applauded the White House for its initial commitment.
“Premier and its alliance members strongly support the President’s declaration of the opioid epidemic as a public health emergency,” Childs said. “This move helps ease regulations, allowing state and local officials to redirect funds to address the epidemic as well as expanding use of telemedicine to treat those with opioid addiction.”
“As an organization that is dedicated to spreading and scaling tools, resources and practices focused on improving healthcare quality and patient safety, Premier is working closely with our members on tackling opioid addiction, overuse and misuse by actively engaging in a variety of strategies aimed at addressing the epidemic.”
However, Democrats including Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon and Nancy Pelosi pointed out that the Administration’s continued eagerness to repeal the ACA and throttle Medicaid funding is antithetical to its stated commitment to stem the opioid tide.
“Now that the Trump administration has finally declared the opioid epidemic the public health emergency that it is, it is critical that its actions follow its words by offering actual solutions that help those struggling with addiction and their loved ones get relief,” Wyden said. “If the administration is serious about stemming the tide of opioid deaths, it should pledge not to support massive cuts to health programs like Medicaid.”
Pelosi added, “The White House’s public health emergency declaration will hopefully be a first step toward seriously confronting the opioid epidemic by this Administration, but much more remains to be done.”
“It is deeply concerning that this declaration, which comes a full three months after the President’s Commission on the Opioid Crisis’s report, fails to authorize federal funding to help those Americans locked in a life-or-death struggle with opioid addiction.”
Pennsylvania Governor Tom Wolf also tempered his approval with some strong criticism.
“President Trump’s decision to declare the opioid epidemic a public health emergency is an important step, but this is only the beginning,” said Wolf. “The president’s repeated calls to dismantle the Affordable Care Act puts the very Americans he aims to help through this declaration in jeopardy.”
“Without a commitment to fund the crisis in specific ways, it’s difficult to say how much this declaration can do. While an awareness of this critical health emergency is important, an increased availability of grant money would help. Every effort to fund treatment, including medication-assisted treatment options, should be explored.”
While the announcement certainly indicates that the Administration is taking the opioid crisis seriously, the federal government will need to make additional investments, work with stakeholders more closely on expanding treatment options, and direct rule makers to reduce regulatory barriers to care if it hopes to make a measurable dent in the crippling crisis.
Tagged Behavioral HealthcareChronic Disease ManagementMental HealthPopulation Health ManagementPreventive CarePublic Health


