Pathologists to study reporting standards with CDC grants

April 10, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 10, 2014 - The College of American Pathologists (CAP) has received two grants totaling more than $1.25 million to fund studies focused on adopting evidence-based laboratory testing guidelines and standardizing the reporting of biomarker test results to cancer registries.  Over the next five years, CAP will use the funding from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to continue its mission of providing pathologists with improved methods of data collection and dissemination while supporting pathologists in their roles as lab experts and diagnosticians.
“Patients and physicians rely on accurate and consistent test results to guide treatment decisions,” said Charles Roussel, chief executive officer for the College of American Pathologists. “Our goal is to help improve patient care through the delivery of standardized laboratory testing and reporting. The CDC funding will enable us to achieve this goal on behalf of patients, pathologists, and laboratory and health care professionals nationwide.”
“By implementing guidelines into clinical practice, hospitals and patients can be assured that the laboratory is following consistent procedures based on scientific evidence and expert consensus opinion,” added Raouf Nakhleh, MD, FCAP, a pathologist at the Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Fla., and lead on the CAP’s CDC project to improve the impact of laboratory practice guidelines. “With the CDC grant, we hope to increase awareness for and adoption of the published guidelines, as well as guidelines in development.”
As cancer registries and other databanks of patient information become increasingly important sources for researchers and clinicians relying on analytics to make treatment decisions and study rare diseases, standardized reporting methods will enable scientists to benefit from cleaner data that is easier to use.
Dig Deeper
Precision Medicine Aids 20% Drop in Pediatric Cancer Deaths
Machine Learning Identifies Ovarian Cancer with 91% Accuracy
AMA, Patient Groups Join “All of Us” Precision Medicine Outreach
“The CDC grant will enable us to develop and maintain standards and best practices for reporting cancer biomarker test results to cancer registries,” said Patrick L. Fitzgibbons, MD, FCAP, a pathologist at St. Jude Medical Center in Fullerton, CA. “Our long-term goal is to standardize the reporting of cancer biomarker data and eliminate the need for manual abstraction of biomarker data, reducing errors and costs and, ultimately, improving patient care.”
CAP counts more than 18,000 board-certified pathologists among its members.  Its 65-year-old Laboratory Improvement Programs accredits labs worldwide and provide proficiency testing for 20,000 laboratories across the globe.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceHealthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation Health Management


