Half of hospitals plan data analytics, health IT purchases

June 05, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 05, 2014 - About half of hospitals are planning to make significant investments in data analytics infrastructure and other health IT needs, says a survey by Premier Inc., with spending on clinical healthcare information technology projected to reach $26 billion a year by 2017. Seventeen percent of hospital executives cited non-EHR health IT acquisitions as a major strategy for improving the supply chain, with data standardization and comparative value analytics making up some of the industry’s top priorities.
“Health systems can no longer depend on one-off changes to drive expenses down. They now need to address variation across their systems,” says Premier President of Supply Chain Services Durral R. Gilbert. “This is a marathon, not a sprint, and it requires connecting cost, clinical and supply chain data and analytics to drive significant change over the long term.”
Providers are deeply worried about how changing reimbursement structures and slashes to Medicare reimbursements will affect their business operations, the survey found.  Sixty-eight percent of C-suite executives cited reimbursement cuts as the trend anticipated to cause the most disruption for their organizations and 24% think that accountable care and pay-for-performance contracts will be similarly significant.
“With sequestration, Affordable Care Act changes and other legislation, hospitals have been incurring billions of dollars in payment cuts with much more to come,” Gilbert added. “For many providers, barely breaking even under Medicare is equivalent to success these days.”  While some providers are exploring staff reductions as a way to cope with financial pressures, many executives cited primary care physician and nursing shortages – 47% and 28% respectively – as having a major impact on their work.
Dig Deeper
Healthcare CIOs Turning to Data Analytics for Business Intelligence
Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
With New Players Looming, Healthcare Needs Big Data to Support Scale
Despite widespread dissatisfaction or indifference towards electronic health record systems, hospitals are pushing ahead with investments in other health IT systems, including data analytics platforms for clinical care and financial operations.  “Hospitals are making necessary investments in infrastructure to meet the demands of this new generation of healthcare,” said Michael J. Alkire, chief operating officer, Premier. “These investments are targeting HIT to provide more connected and efficient patient care, and modern clinical equipment that can deliver improved outcomes.”
Executives from mid-sized hospitals are most likely to make investments in health IT at the moment, the poll found, while smaller facilities are more focused on acquiring clinical equipment to boost the quality and capabilities of surgical, lab, and radiology services.  Health IT is a big driver of higher costs, the executives noted, but the anticipated return on investment may make the initial outlay worth it.
Premier polled 127 C-suite executives, primarily CEOs, COOs, and CFOs, from 112 hospitals in 32 states for its Spring 2014 Economic Outlook survey.  The executives represented a mix of hospital types and sizes.
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


