HRSA Awards $200M for Opioid Abuse, Behavioral Health Services

September 15, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 15, 2017 - The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) has announced $200 million in grant funding to help local communities deliver behavioral health services and proactive responses to opioid abuse.
The funding will be divided between 1178 health centers and 13 rural health organizations in every US state and the District of Columbia, as well as Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and US territories in the Pacific Basin.
“No corner of our country, from rural areas to urban centers, has escaped the scourge of the opioid crisis,” said HHS Secretary Tom Price, MD. “These grants from HRSA go directly to local organizations, which are best situated to address substance abuse and mental health issues in their own communities.”
Dig Deeper
Communities Tackle Opioid Abuse with EHRs, Population Health
CMS Releases Medicare Opioid Prescribing Maps, Data Resources
Addressing Opioid Abuse with Analytics, Population Health Strategies
The money will help community health centers improve the integration of mental health care into the primary care environment, support education and awareness of opioid abuse, and leverage health IT tools for more effective prevention and treatment strategies.
"Nationally, about half of all care for common mental health conditions happens in the primary care settings," said HRSA Administrator George Sigounas, MS, PhD. "In health centers, where people are often most comfortable, staff with varied expertise have a unique opportunity to provide mental health and substance abuse services to patients who wouldn’t otherwise seek or have access to treatment.”
Rural states, where the opioid epidemic has become deeply entrenched, will receive an additional $3.3 million to support the Rural Health Opioid Program (RHOP) and the Substance Abuse Treatment Telehealth Network Grant Program (SAT -TNGP).  Both initiatives aim to help rural providers deploy evidence-based interventions to overcome the unique challenges of patients living in remote locations.
Providers and patients in Arizona, Arkansas, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, Montana, Ohio, and Virginia will benefit from RHOP funding, which will help connect individuals with local resources and build effective partnerships to play a supporting role in behavioral health.
Approximately $670,000 will go towards funding three SAT-TNGP organizations that will utilize telehealth and remote care technologies to deliver care to individuals in the most far-flung locations in the nation.
The new funding follows on the heels of several large grants from HHS and the CDC to help fuel a coordinated national response to the ongoing opioid abuse epidemic. 
In April HHS and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) announced the disbursal of $485 million in funds provided under the 21st Century Cures Act.  Recipients are directed to use the money to increase access to substance abuse treatment, improve data-driven prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMP), and train providers in prevention and treatment techniques.
HHS followed up with an additional $70 million in June, authorized by the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act (CARA).  That funding is intended to support first responders and expand the reach of medication-assisted treatment for opioid abuse and overdoses.
“We are committed to bringing everything the federal government has to bear on this health crisis,” said Price at the time. “Building partnerships and providing resources to state and local governments as well as non-government organizations are absolutely critical to this effort. The purpose of these grants is to empower the heroes in this fight—the men and women on the forefront of supporting prevention, treatment, and recovery initiatives in their communities.”
The CDC has also chipped in with $28.6 million in funds to further develop PDMP initiatives in the majority of US states.  Public health surveillance programs and overdose analytics initiatives will also benefit from the funds.
These funding efforts will ensure that healthcare organizations and community stakeholders can rise to the challenge of HHS’ five-point plan to fight opioid abuse, which includes improving access to treatment and recovery services, expanding the use of overdose-reversing drugs, using data to better understand the patterns of the epidemic, supporting pain and research addiction, and developing better strategies for pain management.
For more information on individual state grants and the community health organizations benefitting from the funding, please click here.
Tagged Behavioral HealthcareChronic Disease ManagementHHSMental HealthPatient SafetyPopulation Health Management


