Stanford starts first clinical informatics fellowship program

August 07, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 07, 2014 - Stanford Medicine will offer the first accredited clinical informatics fellowship for physicians that will lead to a certification in the new subspecialty.  While physicians can take a board exam to gain their certification until 2017, they will need to complete a fellowship after that time to achieve board eligibility.  The program is the first to be accredited for that purpose by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education.
“This fellowship represents the formal recognition of a major change in medicine, one that merges best-practice clinical training with advanced information technology and analytical expertise,” said Ed Kopetsky, chief information officer at Stanford Children’s Health and Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford. “Clinicians with a strong knowledge of clinical informatics and analytics will not only play a key role in optimizing workflow, but will help us understand more about disease and optimal care methods. In the end, this means better health-care decisions.”
“This accreditation recognizes that our program meets the new national standards in the field of clinical informatics,” added Christopher Longhurst, MD, MS, fellowship director, chief medical information officer for Stanford Children’s Health and clinical associate professor of pediatrics and of medicine at the Stanford School of Medicine. “We are the first because of our long history of biomedical informatics, our breadth of experience and our program’s high level of collaboration among physicians and researchers in numerous specialties.”
Clinical informatics was approved as a new subspecialty in 2011, with the first physicians passing the exam in December of 2013.  “These physicians have demonstrated that they understand the design and implementation of informatics systems, and are poised to integrate these solutions into their healthcare delivery organizations,” said American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA) Board of Directors Chair Blackford Middleton, MD, MPH, MSc, FACMI when announcing the first certified physicians. “It is illustrative of the ubiquitous need across our entire healthcare delivery system to engage with professionals who understand how to improve the value of care with informatics.”
Dig Deeper
Health Information Management Pros Need Security, EHR Data Skills
Academic, Research Orgs to Form Health Data, Informatics Center
“Basic Science” of Healthcare Big Data Analytics Still Needs Work
The Stanford program is seeking four fellows to fill its open positions for the two-year program.  Successful applicants will work on informatics projects and complete coursework while continuing to engage in clinical practice.  Fellows will primary train at the Department of Information Services at Stanford Children’s Health, but will also be offered rotations at Stanford Health Care, Sutter Health, Kaiser Permanente, the VA hospital in Palo Alto, and HP Labs.
Tagged Clinical InformaticsClinical IntelligenceHealthcare Informatics


