Patient safety is key with Ebola, but are nurses safe, too?

October 07, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 07, 2014 - Patient safety is a constant topic of discussion in hospitals and healthcare organizations around the nation, but a new survey from National Nurses United (NNU) calls into question the healthcare industry’s preparedness to keep clinical staff safe and well during an infectious disease outbreak.  Even though the Ebola scare in Texas is putting hospitals on edge, 80% of nurses say that their leaders have not communicated any formal policy regarding the admission of patients with the deadly virus, indicating a widespread lack of preparedness for hospitals to handle any seriously communicable infectious disease.
With Texas Health Presbyterian waffling on the reasons why Thomas Eric Duncan was mistakenly released from the emergency room, NNU fielded a survey to gauge the readiness of nearly 700 registered nurses at 250 hospitals to combat an infectious public health threat.  The results were not too encouraging.
One-third of nurses say their hospital does not have sufficient supplies of protective gear, including eye protection and fluid-resistant gowns, while almost 40% said that their employer has no plans to equip isolation rooms with plastic covers for bedding or to discard linens after being used by a patient at risk for infectious disease.  Eighty-seven percent of nurses have not attended educational sessions that include the ability for them to ask questions.  More than sixty percent added that their hospitals do not properly reallocate patients in response to the intensive use of resources required by an isolation patient.
“We warned that it was just a matter of time in an interconnected world that we would see Ebola in the US. Now, everyone should recognize that Texas is not an island either, and as we’ve heard from nurses across the US, hospitals here are not ready to confront this deadly disease,” said NNU executive director RoseAnn DeMoro.
Dig Deeper
EHRs, Clinical Decision Support Top 2017 Patient Safety Hazard List
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Decision Support, Big Data Analytics Reduce Hospital Blood Use
NNU is urging hospitals to take the lessons in Dallas to heart and provide full training for their personnel in infectious disease response and safety.  Healthcare providers must acquire hazmat equipment and properly stock isolation rooms to reduce the risk of infection and keep staff members safe.  Organizations should also examine their staffing levels to ensure that no patients receive inadequate care during a period of heightened caution or media scrutiny that could distract clinical workers or take them away from their usual duties.
Texas Health Presbyterian told the media that they had done one Ebola drill before experiencing the real event, said Bonnie Castillo, RN, director of NNU’s Registered Nurse Response Network, but confusion over the role of their EHR in the incident remains. “As we have been saying for many months, electronic health records systems can, and do, fail,” she said. “That’s why we must continue to rely on the professional, clinical judgment and expertise of registered nurses and physicians to interact with patients, as well as uniform systems throughout the US that is essential for responding to pandemics, or potential pandemics.”
Tagged Healthcare QualityHospital QualityPatient Safety


