CMS Seeks Participants to Take the Million Hearts Challenge

April 05, 2016

By Jacqueline LaPointe
April 05, 2016 - According to a recent announcement, CMS has re-opened the application period for the Million Hearts: Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Model (MH Model) test, an increasingly popular program focused on cardiovascular disease prevention.
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death for men and women, implicated in one out of every three deaths. The healthcare system spends approximately $300 billion annually on the disease.
The Million Hearts organization aims to prevent one million heart attacks and strokes by 2017 while reducing healthcare costs.
CMS partnered with Million Hearts to design a five-year prevention program test for Medicare beneficiaries at risk for cardiovascular disease. The program uses patient-centered and population-level prevention methods to reduce the risk of heart attack and stroke and evaluate the success of value-based financial incentives.
Dig Deeper
ACOs Lack Resources, Skills for Population Health Management
CMS Expands Comprehensive Primary Care Plus to New Regions
Value-Based Care Requires Good Big Data, Better Communication
The model uses a data-driven predictive analytics method to investigate the 10-year risk of heart attack and stroke in Medicare beneficiaries, who have not previously experienced a heart attack or stroke.
Participating healthcare providers will use the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 10-year Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease pooled cohort risk calculator to assess all eligible Medicare beneficiaries.
The tool uses patient information, such as age, gender, blood pressure, cholesterol level, and smoking status, to calculate an individual’s risk percentage. Patients who receive a score of over 30 percent are considered high risk.
Physicians will determine specific risk factors, such as smoking or blood pressure level, for each patient and develop personalized risk modification plans.
CMS will select up to 720 practices to participate in the MH Model test. Out of all the practices, about half of the participants will be randomized into the intervention group, and the other half into a control group.
In the intervention group, CMS will reward practices for reducing the aggregate risk percentage of high-risk patients by paying a monthly Cardiovascular Care Management payment per Medicare beneficiary. Participants in the control group will only report clinical data, such as age and cholesterol level, for eligible Medicare beneficiaries.
To apply for the MH Model test, eligible healthcare organizations, including general family practices, internal medicine, geriatric medicine, multi-specialty care, cardiovascular care, or nephrology, must submit a letter of intent to access the full application.
Tagged Care CoordinationPopulation Health ManagementValue Based Care


