ONC: Public health reporting relies on EHR infrastructure

May 01, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 01, 2014 - As the healthcare industry moves through the next stages of Meaningful Use, shifting the emphasis onto leveraging the patient data collected in such enormous quantities by EHRs, providers have new challenges to face when it comes to managing their populations in a large-scale manner.  Public health reporting is an integral part of the effort to improve quality, reach out to vulnerable communities, and conserve resources, but the underlying technical infrastructure may not yet be mature enough to handle the new strain, says a new issue brief from ONC Policy Analyst Lauren Wu.
“As the volume of data coming in to public health agencies continues to increase, public health agencies need to build the technical and administrative infrastructure to receive the data,” Wu writes. “Public health agencies traditionally received reporting data through paper reporting, batch electronic files, and/or through specialty registries. The increasing use of EHRs to collect data is spurring more real-time data collection, and public health agencies are working to build the infrastructure to support more frequent data feeds.”
Public health reporting has skyrocketed with the growth of the EHR Incentive Programs, with 40% of eligible providers and 54% of hospitals submitting immunization data to state registries.  While only 6% of providers have chosen to submit syndromic surveillance data, hospitals are significantly ahead of the curve.  Twenty-percent report syndromic data, as of November 2013, and 15% have submitted lab results to public health agencies.  “With many of the public health objectives becoming required in Stage 2 beginning in 2014,” Wu adds, “more and more providers and hospitals will submit electronic data to public health agencies.”
“Additionally for meaningful use Stage 2, public health agencies must develop an on-boarding process to 1) receive and process registrations of intent from providers (EPs, EHs, and CAHs) to begin sending data to meet public health objectives, 2) prioritize providers, invite providers to begin testing and validation, engage in testing and validation, and 3) after successful testing and validation, receive ongoing transmission data from the provider,” she says. “There is a need for more resources to support the on-boarding process.”
Dig Deeper
HIV/AIDS Patient Registries, EHR Use Improve Population Health
CMS Unveils Interoperability, EHR Clinical Documentation Changes
AMA: Real EHR Data in Med School Will Boost “Informatics IQ”
A number of projects around the country have attempted to develop data standards and increase the analytical capabilities of public health registries in order to support population health management, disease trending, and allocation of resources.  Statewide health information exchanges (HIEs) are at the forefront of this space, but many still face issues when it comes to the ability to standardize the disparate sources of data they gather from myriad providers.
“Many emerging initiatives, such as consumer engagement and structured data capture, hold potential for improving public health reporting and population health management through creation of standards,” Wu agrees. “Aligning the standards used for public health with other sectors in health care will also demonstrate public health’s role in reducing health care costs, a key driver in health care reform efforts. The progress being made today sets a foundation for infrastructure and standards for better health outcomes and lower cost of care, not only for individuals, but also for public health.”
Tagged EHR UseHealth Information ExchangeMeaningful UsePopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementPublic Health


