CHIME, DirectTrust Partner for “Universal” Health Data Exchange

August 30, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 30, 2017 - CHIME and DirectTrust have entered a partnership geared towards enabling the “universal deployment” of the DirectTrust secure health data exchange framework, the two organizations announced today.
The healthcare CIO professional organization and the data interoperability alliance hope to bring secure messaging and information sharing capabilities to every service site in the country that needs access to patient information for critical decision making.
Hospitals, physician offices, pharmacies, laboratories, long-term care facilities, payers, and public health entities will all be in scope for the ambitious project, CHIME and DirectTrust leaders stated.
Dig Deeper
Health Information Exchange Data Scarce, Inaccurate, Incomplete
New Approach Helps Health Information Exchanges Cross State Lines
How Health Information Exchange Models Impact Data Analytics
“Our members strongly support the further development of a standards-based national platform to safely and securely exchange patient data,” said CHIME CEO and President Russell P. Branzell. “DirectTrust offers an infrastructure that goes hand in hand with our goals to assist and lead where needed to improve patient care, engage patients in their health and reduce patient safety incidents.”
DirectTrust President and CEO David C. Kibbe, MD, MBA, echoed Branzell’s optimism and commitment to the cause.
“We are thrilled to be working with such a strong leader in CHIME and its membership of experienced health IT professionals,” he said. “There is great potential in our new collaboration to further standardize and simplify health information exchange interfaces on a national basis for an expanded variety of use cases.”
“The value of a simple and secure means of exchange that can be relied upon everywhere for the exchange of health data and information is a necessary step forward in attaining the goals of national health IT interoperability consistent with existing national policy.”
Both organizations have been working on parallel paths towards enhancing the healthcare industry’s ability to share critical patient information when and where it is needed.
In July, DirectTrust announced it had reached an important milestone in its quest to connect care providers in a vendor-agnostic manner, achieving 68 percent growth to reach 100,000 healthcare organizations. 
Nearly 1.5 million individual Direct addresses have enabled clinicians to conduct 40.1 million transactions in the second quarter of 2017, adding to a total of 241 million messages exchanged over the framework’s lifetime.
Direct messages have been exchanged between more than 350 different ONC-certified electronic health records.
CHIME, meanwhile, has continued to apply steady pressure on rulemakers to prioritize interoperability and the development of shared data exchange standards within regulatory frameworks, technology development initiatives, and other key activities.   
The association has also offered to put its money where its mouth is by launching a $1 million contest to improve patient identification and matching techniques – a crucial underlying competency for accurate and trusted data exchange.  The challenge will conclude in November 2017.
“The National Patient ID Challenge, which we launched to accurately and safely identify patients no matter what the healthcare setting, is a perfect example of these needs that require a strong national exchange infrastructure,” said Branzell. 
“Having these two elements in place will go far toward offering high-quality, timely patient care anytime, anywhere in the US. We look forward to working with DirectTrust to make this a reality.” 
The firm support of many of the nation’s chief information officers is likely to bolster the new partnership’s efforts to bring low-cost, high-impact health data exchange to a much broader set of healthcare organizations.
“As CIOs, we constantly are assessing what gaps need to be filled to meet current and future technological demands in our health systems,” said CHIME Board Chair Liz Johnson, CIO of Acute Care Hospitals & Applied Clinical Informatics at Tenet Healthcare Corporation. “We welcome the opportunity to add our perspective as these exchange networks mature and expand nationally.”     
Tagged CHIMEDirectTrustHealth Data ExchangeHealth Information ExchangeInteroperability


