Relaxed hypertension guidelines to affect millions of patients

December 20, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 20, 2013 - Tens of millions of Medicare-aged patients with high blood pressure may need re-evaluation according to new guidelines released by the Eighth Joint National Commission, this week raising the acceptable pressure level from 140/90 to 150/90 for persons over 60.  Following similarly significant changes to treatment plans for cholesterol care in November, the JNC 8 recommendations change the goals for one of the major risk factors for cardiovascular disease and stroke.
Nearly half of the 78 million Americans with high blood pressure are uncontrolled, the report published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) says, making hypertension one of the biggest population health issues in the country.  The panel of experts on cardiovascular health used a mix of scientific data and expert opinion to reach the new guidelines and develop a treatment algorithm taking into account other conditions, such as kidney disease and diabetes, which may affect heart health.
However, this approach has attracted immediate criticism from other experts, some of which has been published in accompanying JAMA editorials. “Distilling the complexity of data… into simple recommendations when the evidence is nuanced and rapidly evolving is a challenge,” say three JAMA editors.  “Do important public health messages need to be simple to be effective? It has taken a decade to teach clinicians and patients that high BP is defined as levels higher than 140/90 mm Hg, so how long will it take to teach them that these targets need to be altered to 150/90 mm Hg for patients who reach 60 years of age?”
Noting that clinical “guidelines” have rapidly turned into stringent quality measures tied to reimbursements, the editors question whether or not physicians should be given more leeway to consider individual patients and their health rather than striving to meet codified performance metrics based on recommendations that have turned into facts.
Dig Deeper
Population Health is Top Data Analytics Challenge for Providers, Payers
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
Clinical Decision Support May Boost ID of Chronic Kidney Disease
“Clinical guidelines are at the intersection between research evidence and clinical actions that can improve patient outcomes,” the JNC 8 researchers counter.  “Although this guideline provides evidence-based recommendations for the management of high BP and should meet the clinical needs of most patients, these recommendations are not a substitute for clinical judgment, and decisions about care must carefully consider and incorporate the clinical characteristics and circumstances of each individual patient.”
The editorial also mentions that while the new hypertension guidelines may lead to less treatment in elderly patients, the AHA cholesterol plan markedly increases the number of patients who will be given statins for routine treatment.  These conflicting ideologies may confuse providers and patients.
“There is an important need to create a national consensus group to draft an updated comprehensive practice guideline that would harmonize the hypertension guideline with other cardiovascular risk guidelines and recommendations, thereby resulting in a more coherent overall cardiovascular prevention strategy,” the article states.  “Individual recommendations from discrete guidelines—such as for hypertension, cholesterol, and obesity—do not reflect the integrated care needed for many patients seen in practice. Once the right targets for BP thresholds are determined, patients and physicians need to work together to consistently achieve these new goals.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


