HIMSS: Population health, patient surveillance ripe for growth

July 28, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 28, 2014 - Hospitals are starting to invest more heavily in population health management applications such as community outreach and patient acuity software, and are doing their best to be proactive in the fight against hospital-acquired conditions with infection surveillance systems.  As reimbursements start to rely more heavily on quality and outcomes, and patients become pickier in their choice of providers, hospitals are building an arsenal of health IT tools to help combat some of the most critical patient care issues they are facing, says Lorren Pettit, Vice President of Market Research for HIMSS Analytics.
“We’re seeing opportunities in what we’ve started to call ‘germ-related’ applications,” Pettit told HealthITAnalytics while discussing the Summer 2014 edition of the Essentials of the US Hospital Market report.  “Infection surveillance systems and outreach lab services are areas where there isn’t a lot of market penetration yet, and that’s why we’re calling it a maturing market.”
“When we think about infection surveillance systems, the real need is for identifying complications in a hospital,” he continued.  “We are trying to diminish sepsis and infections so that when patients are discharged, they’re not being readmitted with a complication that they’ve acquired from the hospital.  That has a financial implication for hospitals given the quality penalties instituted by CMS, so this sort of smells right.”
As hospitals bulk up their health IT infrastructure to move beyond the basics of the EHR, they are finding that population health management might not be as easy as it sounds.  Despite assertions that small steps towards community outreach and risk stratification can make a significant difference in patient outcomes, understanding where to begin in the process of compiling tools and best practices can be difficult.
Dig Deeper
VA to Get “Aggressive” with Hospital Quality Improvement Program
Big Data Analytics, Machine Learning Support 2017 Most Wired Hospitals
Will Clinical Decision Support, Health IT Cut Diagnostic Errors?
“‘Population health’ is probably one of those terms that people are throwing around, but it’s pretty ethereal,” Pettit says.  “It may be more of an aspirational thing that maybe only a handful of hospitals are actually doing anything about.  But when we put it in terms of, let’s say, diabetes management, it becomes much closer to what hospitals do in regards to being involved in population management. It makes perfect sense that hospitals are going to be much more progressive in reaching out to different parts of the market to be actively involved in trying to manage diabetes and the lab services, like checking for blood sugars.”
Past versions of the quarterly report show an ongoing trend towards health IT systems that complement the EHR, including financial modeling applications and clinical analytics tools that form the foundation for patient surveillance and other data-intensive population health and quality activities.  But not all hospitals have the resources available to make big purchases at the moment, and the IT acquisition market took a hit over the winter as hospitals hunkered down to face the implementation of Stage 2 certified EHRs.
“As an industry, there are so many forces hitting all at once,” Pettit says.  “We’re treading water just trying to keep our heads up.  Some hospitals are definitely making progress, but for the majority of hospitals, they’re just being reactive because that’s all they can manage to do.”
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHospital QualityPopulation Health Management


