Emory, Kaiser Permanente Form Population Health Partnership

June 14, 2018

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 14, 2018 - Emory Healthcare and Kaiser Permanente have announced a partnership aimed at improving population health management and expanding care access while supporting patients within their communities.
The collaboration will turn Emory University Hospital Midtown and Emory Saint Joseph’s Hospital into the primary hospitals for The Southeast Permanente Medical Group (TSPMG) and members in the Atlanta region, creating a shared, integrated care and coverage models for individuals seeking services in the area.
“This unique collaboration will combine the highly complementary strengths of Kaiser Permanente and Emory Healthcare, both of which have rich histories in medical excellence, exceptional service, research and quality,” says Jim Simpson, Georgia president, Kaiser Permanente.
Dig Deeper
Population Health Management Starts with Flagging High Costs
Which Population Health Companies Get Top Marks for Value?
How Do Population Health, Public Health, Community Health Differ?
“Our joint focus will be to create a premier, integrated care and coverage model committed to improving health and affordability for our members, and better addressing health disparities, while working collaboratively to increase the number of people and communities who benefit from what our organizations can accomplish together.”
Emory Healthcare will continue its existing relationships with all its affiliated health plans, and the organization does not anticipate any changes in care delivery or care access for existing patients of the two facilities.
Kaiser Permanente, which has provided a “capital contribution” towards expanding the two hospitals, will also maintain some of its existing affiliations with other care locations, but will manage members seen at Midtown and Saint Joseph’s through its care management models with the help of Emory providers.
“Our physician groups view one another with the highest respect and look forward to learning and collaborating together,” says Mary Wilson, MD, executive medical director and president of The Southeast Permanente Medical Group, Inc.
“We are aligned in our values and mission to deliver the highest quality care while honoring the unique needs of our patients. I am excited to partner on our inpatient model of care, as well as leverage our mutual research capabilities to further impact the practice of medicine. Together we will transform the care and quality we deliver to the patients we serve.”
In addition to deploying a fully integrated model of care, the two organizations will work together to control costs, reduce disparities in care, and educate healthcare professionals.
“The long-term benefits of this collaboration will serve as a national model for other health systems and extend beyond our two organizations,” says Jonathan S. Lewin, CEO of Emory Healthcare and executive vice president for Health Affairs of Emory University.
“Patients and communities far beyond Georgia will benefit from the transformation in care, affordability, research, prevention and health outcomes that will come from this initiative. Emory and Kaiser Permanente share closely aligned missions to serve our communities and bring together the best of academic scholarship, research and patient- and family-centered care.”
Kaiser Permanente and Emory Healthcare are planning to start seeing patients together by October of 2018.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPatient Access to CarePopulation Health ManagementValue Based Care


