US ranks last in international care access, quality report

June 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 17, 2014 - The United States healthcare system has a little bit of soul searching to do after it ranked dead last for efficiency, equity, and overall health on the Commonwealth Fund’s latest international report.  Compared to ten other developed nations, including the United Kingdom, Switzerland, France, Germany, Australia, and Canada, the US is nearly twice as expensive as most other nations while delivering a fraction of the quality.
Despite a labor-intensive push to improve the healthcare system through the adoption of health information technology like EHRs and data analytics, the US continues its streak of underperformance chronicled in Commonwealth Fund reports starting in 2004.  The United Kingdom and Switzerland shared the top ranking, while Sweden, Australia, and Germany rounded out the top five.  The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, France, and Canada followed the top nations.
While the Affordable Care Act is too new to have made an impact on the rankings, the report notes that even when the ACA is fully implemented, access to care will remain more expensive in the US than in other wealthy nations.  Countries with universal, government-sponsored healthcare, like the United Kingdom, Canada, and Germany, ranked highest in access to care and experienced the fewest differentials between patients of above- and below-average economic standing.
Dig Deeper
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
Preventable Hospital Readmissions Fall Dramatically Across US
Avoidable Admissions for Long-Term Care Dual Eligibles Down 31%
“Americans with below-average incomes were much more likely than their counterparts in other countries to report not visiting a physician when sick; not getting a recommended test, treatment, or follow-up care; or not filling a prescription or skipping doses when needed because of costs,” the report says. “On each of these indicators, one-third or more lower-income adults in the US said they went without needed care because of costs in the past year.”
However, the report does show a few bright spots for American patients, including the patient-centeredness of care and the timeliness of care, where the US ranked fourth and fifth respectively.  The country also took third place in the effectiveness of care, but dipped to seventh place for patient safety.
“Many US hospitals and health systems are dedicated to improving the process of care to achieve better safety and quality, but the US can also learn from innovations in other countries, including public reporting of quality data, payment systems that reward high-quality care, and a team approach to management of chronic conditions,” the report concludes. “Based on these patient and physician reports, and with the enactment of health reform, the United States should be able to make significant strides in improving the delivery, coordination, and equity of the health care system in coming years.”
  Tagged Accountable CareHospital QualityPatient Care


