Study: Free clinics can save millions with preventative care

December 26, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 26, 2013 - While the first step of population health management is knowing what the community looks like and what it needs, the second step is getting patients to show up.  Preventative services and routine care can do wonders for keeping people away from costly and complex hospital admissions, but for many low income populations without health insurance, paying for these services is simply impossible.  A new study from the University of Rhode Island shows that when health care systems offer free walk-in clinics for vulnerable populations, patients are less likely to use the emergency room unnecessarily – and hospitals are much more likely to reap significant cost savings down the line.
Dr. Annie De Groot, medical director at the Clinica Esperanza/Hope Clinic, located in one of the poorest neighborhoods of Providence, found that the program was able to save $34 for every dollar spent on non-urgent care for routine issues like colds, women’s health issues, and urinary tract infections.  Staffed by nurses, the clinic has projected a future cost savings of $1.28 million after only a few months in operation. The clinic only serves the uninsured who don’t have a primary care physician, De Groot says, and also offers community health services like a diabetes support group and nutrition programs.
De Groot studied several hundred patients in the Clinica Esperanza/Hope Clinic Emergency Room Diversion (CHEER) program, which provides flu shots and other vaccinations to prevent patients from showing up in the ER with acute issues, ranking each service provided by how much money would be saved in the future by preventing an emergency room visit.  Since 7% of ER visits are for non-urgent issues that could be dealt with on a primary care level, the potential for cost savings through preventative care is enormous.
“With this alarming increase in ER use and the rising costs of health care, we feel strongly that communities could benefit greatly by providing increased access to non-urgent health services for the uninsured,’’ De Groot said. “Following the CHEER model could result in improved health outcomes for those deeply affected by disparities in the system – and reduce health care spending.’’
Tagged Patient CarePopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


