Big Data on Patient Transfers Raises Quality, Snags Revenue

July 14, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 14, 2015 - When it comes to transitions of care, much has been made about the need for a patient’s data to follow him or her along the care continuum.  Primary care providers, specialists, and hospitals exist in isolated data bubbles, their conversations foiled by a lack of health data interoperability that leaves patients vulnerable upon discharge to their homes or a long-term care facility. 
But patients face similar problems when transferring between acute hospital settings for further treatment or specialty care, a process that may be just as cumbersome and confusing for patients and admissions staff alike.  Matching patients with the right provider or care setting for their individual needs is just as important as ensuring that their medical history data will be available to their new clinicians – and both tasks require a coordinated approach to health IT infrastructure development.  
At Rush University Medical Center (RUMC) in the Chicago area, patients are constantly transferring into the health system to receive specialized treatment or ongoing care.  A flood of incoming patients represent a significant opportunity to increase revenue and expand a sterling reputation, but also presents some challenges for staffing, care coordination, and the movement of patient data across the system.
“We have various agreements throughout Illinois and parts of the Midwest when it comes to bringing their patients into our hospitals based on our specialties,” explained Shonda Morrow, JD, MS, RN, Director of Nursing Resource Management at Rush University Medical Center.  “We have to think about what that means in terms of needing more appropriate staffing to handle the volume.  What's the bottom line? What's our contribution margin?  We have to look at why we’re in the business of accepting patient transfers and how that helps our revenue cycle.”
At RUMC, as at most healthcare organizations, the transfer process starts with a phone call.  “Our nurses are on the phone doing a clinical assessment and evaluation of a patient, determining what level of care they need at what level of urgency,” Morrow said.  “They assess how and where this patient should be placed, as well as they're determining the mode of transportation.”
READ MORE: Information Governance Gaining Ground in Healthcare Organizations
These phone calls generate a great deal of important data on the patient and his or her needs, which must be tracked and added to the record somehow.  The transfer process may take several hours or even a few days, said Jane Krivickas, Manager of Patient Placement at the Rush Transfer Center, which can make for a convoluted narrative.  Several different nurses might handle different aspects of the process, and communication between staff members must be clear and streamlined.
“It would be beautiful if every transfer could be handled in 10 or 15 minutes from beginning to end,” she said.  “In reality, a lot of these cases take multiple phone calls and a lot of reaching out to different physicians and different service lines. That can stretch across staffing shifts, depending on the complexity of the transfer.”
“That’s why we need to have software to help document that data.  I've worked at other facilities where the documentation tool was not there.  The records were all hand-written or there was just a series of make-shift protocols in place.  With TeleTracking, our patient transfer record system, we're able to capture who took the notes and who they spoke to.  Every time someone updates something, it's recorded with a time stamp.”
The Transfer Center’s software is connected to Rush University Medical Center’s Epic EHR with a one-way interface that allows patient transfer staff to quickly and easily pull basic registration and demographic data from the EHR into their own TeleTracking system.  “If we've already placed the patient, it pulls over their placement information and then puts it in Transfer Center software for us,” Krivackas said.  “That means we don't have to take the time with an outside hospital to ask, ‘What's the patient's home address?  What is their payer?’  It's all going to come across from our EHR.”
Not only does a unified and connected documentation platform help with coordination, but it can provide an important record of care for any future legal concerns, Krivackas added.
READ MORE: Providers Struggle with Time, Tools for Revenue Cycle Analytics
“I always say we're the gleam of the legal department's eye because they know they can come to us any time of the week and very easily pull that qualitative data on how the patient was doing,” she said.  “What are the vital signs or their weight?  Do we have updated vital signs?  What nurse did we speak with at the outside hospital?  Who was our contact at the ambulance company?  All of those things can be updated regularly as the case progresses.  And if the first nurse goes home for the day, the second nurse can easily pull that up and see that documentation.”
“We can answer a lot of questions about the patient’s care, even after the case is closed out,” she continued.  “Did we ask for the latest films?  Did we get the right reports?  We have the ability to pull that case from historical data so incredibly quickly and provide that to our leaders and our physicians who might need that.”
Collecting and exchanging standardized big data on the patient transfer process also allows RUMC to engage in some introspection.  With workflow optimization and efficient resource utilization remaining hot topics of concern for healthcare systems, using patient transfer data to examine potential inefficiencies and investigate process improvement is an added benefit.
“One of the things that we most closely look at is volume,” said Krivackas.  “We have to make sure that we have the appropriate amount of staff to answer the phone.  How long are those calls taking us?  How many are we receiving?  Of how many we receive, how many are being completed?  Sometimes we don't end up accepting the patient.  Sometimes we accept the patient, but the patient doesn't have the right insurance coverage, or the family changes their mind, or the patient has a status change.”
“A little over a year ago, we were discussing some of the changes in our marketplace here in the Chicagoland area,” she recalled.  “We decided to be somewhat conservative in our projections for this year.  We knew we had a good trajectory going at the end of last fiscal year.  We had seen increases throughout the course of the year, but we thought, ‘With these marketplace changes, let's go with a 5% increase year over year.’" 
READ MORE: Change Healthcare Plans Payer, Provider RCM Blockchain Tool
“We ended our fiscal year on July 1.  That month, we basically broke a record.  We had a really great month.  We broke another record in August.  It continued like that for the entire year.  We're just pulling our data from this May.  Going into May, we saw a 19 percent increase year over year in both transfer request volume and transfer completed volume.  We shattered the goal that we had set for ourselves.”
Morrow and Krivackas approached hospital leadership to request some assistance after demonstrating a record of exceeding expectations.  With the addition of a new service line, the quickening pace of the transfer center’s success demanded some extra help, the team thought, and RUMC’s executive leaders agreed.
“We were approved for two additional full-time employees before the usual budget cycle because we looked at our patient volume data – just how many calls per person and how long it takes to do a call – and compared that with what we lose when we decline a case and we don't have that availability or we can't get to that call fast enough and we lose it to another facility,” said Krivackas.  “Taking that kind of data and presenting it to our nursing team allowed us additional staff for what we needed.”
The availability of quantifiable data is at the core of the Transfer Center’s shrewd revenue cycle management, agreed Jason Rosenberg, Business Manager for the Division of Nursing, who works with Morrow and Krivackas to manage the transfer team’s financial needs.
“We have been able to come up with a pretty good data to show when we would warrant additional resources on certain shifts throughout the day,” Rosenberg said.  “We also work closely with the corporate finance team and the strategic planning team to come up with more of those contribution margin net incomes that we continuously look at.”
“Unfortunately, we only get that data on a quarterly basis,” he acknowledged. “A large part of my role is to extrapolate what we've been averaging quarter-to-quarter and keep the team informed on how much money and how much revenue they're bringing into the hospital for both capital and operating processes and assessments.  It's always good to utilize different systems and keep the staff informed on not only the operational procedures and metrics, but the financial aspects, too.”
Being transparent with the team about the impacts of their efforts is a major goal for the Transfer Center’s leaders.  “We really wanted to keep the frontline team aware of just how hard they were working,” Krivacaks said. 
“It’s one thing to feel it, but it’s quite another to see it printed out in hard numbers.  Jason was able to create a report that was sent out daily to our entire team as well as our physician director, myself, Shonda, and our associate vice president.  It shows how many requests we receive per day, how many we've completed, and what our completion rate was for the day. “
“At the end of the day, you could pull up your average,” she explained.  “Just three full days into June, we had already done over 40 accepted cases.  We're well above our daily average for the month.  People can see that every day.  It's one thing to say, ‘Work harder; work harder.  Get more transfers.’  But it’s so good to be able to have the proof that we’re moving in the right direction.  It's right there on the paper, and I think it gives them a sense of pride in their job.”
The Transfer Center’s efforts have helped the health system as a whole understand its strategic goals and chart a course for the future, Morrow added, both to increase revenue and continue to push for quality care improvements. 
“From a strategic perspective, when we're able to look at our volumes and trends, we're able to look at what service lines we're getting from outside hospitals.  For example, we have a major flow of neurology patients.  We can look at our data and tell that department if they need to increase their practice or change the way they are operating.  Or from a congratulatory perspective, we can share the recognition that they’re really contributing to the care of patients with those medical conditions.”
“It’s also helpful for marketing, because we can back up the fact that we’re a great place for patients with neurological issues to seek care,” she pointed out.   “We can get them into the hospital quickly, make sure they get the right treatments, and be certain that we’re going to be very successful with how we provide care.”
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsHealth Information ManagementRevenue Cycle AnalyticsRevenue Cycle Management


