FDA Seeks Patient Engagement for Clinical Trials, Precision Medicine

January 03, 2018

By Jessica Kent
January 03, 2018 - The FDA is seeking nominations of individuals interested in joining the new Patient Engagement Collaborative (PEC), which will discuss how to improve patient engagement in medical product development, clinical trials, precision medicine, and other regulatory matters.
The FDA is looking for patients, caregivers, and representatives from patient groups with direct or indirect disease experience.
The PEC will include up to 16 members of the patient community, says an accompanying announcement in the Federal Register. The FDA will also ensure that the PEC comprises diverse perspectives and experiences, including individuals from different socioeconomic and demographic backgrounds.
Dig Deeper
Creating a Strategy to Raise Patient Engagement, Satisfaction
FDA Eager for Precision Medicine Under 21st Century Cures Act
FDA, Europe Team up for Precision Medicine, Patient Engagement
“The FDA is committed to collaborating with patients, caregivers, and advocates, as well as incorporating the various perspectives from these groups into the FDA’s regulatory decision-making processes,” wrote FDA officials Nina L. Hunter, PhD, and Rachel E. Sherman, MD, MPH, in an FDA blog post.
“And we know that patients and other stakeholders agree with the agency’s commitment to improving and increasing patient involvement in FDA matters.”
The PEC is a joint effort between the FDA and the Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative (CTTI), a public-private partnership whose mission is increase the quality and efficiency of clinical trials.
The new collaborative comes as a response to comments from patients and stakeholders on the Patient Participation in Medical Product Discussions section of the Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA).
Stakeholders suggested that the FDA create an outside group to offer input on patient engagement across the agency.
The PEC builds on the FDA’s existing patient engagement efforts, including the Patient Focused Drug Development meetings for drugs and biologic products and the Patient Preference Initiative for medical devices.
The Collaborative will be modeled after the European Medicines Agency’s Patients’ and Consumers’ Working Party (PCWP), which has allowed patients to review information and to be involved in Agency regulatory activities.
The FDA’s new Patient Affairs Staff (PAS) will work with medical product centers and offices across the agency to supplement and encourage patient engagement efforts.
The PAS will focus on several key areas, including:
Creating partnerships with external patients to discuss topics around medical product development
Coordinating programs and activities that will maximize best practices and enhance patient engagement
Integrating patient perspectives into the regulatory and scientific process
Building a shared database of patient engagement information
Improving the FDA’s external communications platform to promote their patient engagement activities and regulatory processes
Andrea Furea-Helms, an FDA staffer and patient advocate, will lead the PAS alongside Samir Shaikh, from the Office of Medical Products and Tobacco (OMPT). The two will work to complement and support the FDA’s continuous efforts to improve patient engagement.
Provisions in both the 21st Century Cures Act and the Food and Drug Administration Reauthorization Act of 2017 have also made the new PEC possible. Both work to increase patient participation and integrate patient experiences in the regulatory process.
The FDA has long sought to increase patient engagement in regulatory processes, and first announced the formation of its new patient affairs team in October 2017.
Through this new Collaborative, the FDA hopes to expand patient involvement in the development of personalized medicine and the increased use of patient-reported outcomes and real-world evidence.
The PEC will work to improve transparency, education and communication in regulatory processes and will allow patients to collaborate in medical product development and the FDA review process.
Selection criteria for members of the PEC include the nominee’s potential for meaningful contribution, ability to represent the patient voice and to constructively work with stakeholders, and ability to understand the research enterprise.
The FDA will typically hold PEC meetings four times per year, though additional meetings may be organized as needed. The FDA will give first consideration to nominations received on or before 11:59 p.m. Eastern time on January 29, 2018.
The Federal Register announcement notes that the ultimate goal of the nomination and selection process is to identify individuals who can represent a collective patient voice for their patient community.
By involving patients and caregivers in care directly and incorporating their various perspectives into the FDA’s decision-making process, the FDA hopes to increase patient engagement and improve the patient experience.
For more information on nominating an individual for the committee, please visit the Federal Register announcement here.
Tagged 21st Century Cures ActPatient Engagement MeasuresPatient Engagement StrategiesPrecision Medicine


