Are Standardized Clinical Pathways Stymying Drug Innovation?

February 16, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 16, 2015 - Powerful clinical decision support tools harnessing the potential of big data analytics may make it easier for physicians to set their patients on a standardized road to improvement, but the expansion of pre-approved, packed care may be doing more than just lowering costs. In places where bundled payments based on holistic episodes of care has taken root, these evidence-based, standardized clinical pathways may be having a negative impact on innovation and experimentation that can help those patients that fall outside of treatment methods that receive a payer stamp of approval.
While precision medicine, genomics, and personalized care are becoming big talking points in the research community, is the trend towards financial rewards for a relatively narrow band of evidence-based medicine limiting discovery by making less common treatments too expensive to use routinely?
Standardized clinical pathways are generally a good thing for reducing variation in the way care is provided to patients with diseases that physicians see time and again. Big data and clinical analytics has allowed the healthcare industry to understand that whether it’s breast cancer, heart disease, or diabetes, the majority of patients follow a fairly predictable pattern as their disease progresses, allowing physicians and health insurance providers to standardize the way some portion of patients receive services. As part of a move towards value-based care, many payers and providers are embracing the idea of treating the various services and therapies that are applied throughout the course of the disease as a single “episode of care,” providing a single, bundled payment for sticking with a pre-approved treatment plan.
This method does indeed cut costs when appropriately applied, as UnitedHealthcare found when testing bundled payments for cancer care. Spending fell by 34% over three years when oncologists were asked to meet certain treatment and quality measures in order to receive a single payment for all services provided to a patient with breast cancer. Clinicians were allowed to veer from the path when necessary, and UnitedHealthcare played no role in deciding which pathways had to be used for a certain patient’s needs. They simply received more financial benefits when the correct pathway was used successfully.
“The study, evaluating how physicians might be rewarded for improving clinical outcomes and reducing treatment costs rather than paying them based on the number of drugs administered to treat cancer, demonstrated a significant reduction in total costs for medical care without affecting the quality of care,” said Lee Newcomer, MD, senior vice president of oncology at UnitedHealthcare, one of the article’s authors. “These new payment models benefit patients, doctors, payers and the entire health system, and are particularly important as the nation faces ever-increasing health care costs.”
READ MORE: NIH Opens Up “All of Us” to Research Participants Nationwide
The program was successful enough that UnitedHealthcare added head and neck cancer patients at MD Anderson Cancer Center to the reimbursement pilot in December. “[MD Anderson] has been looking at how to best approach a single price for treating cancers. It is a complex question because cancer is a complex disease and each patient unique,” Thomas Feeley, MD, head of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, and leader of MD Anderson’s Institute for Cancer Care and Innovation said in an interview with RevCycleIntelligence.com. “Bundled pricing is something that patients and care providers want, and this is our first opportunity to better understand how we can manage costs without sacrificing quality care and patient outcomes.”
But no cost-cutting measure is completely free of sacrifice. For oncologists working in a complicated field fraught with unknowns and opportunities for discovery, bundled payments may be squeezing out some important chances for medical research and experimentation with novel pharmaceuticals. The healthcare industry is constantly finding new uses for forgotten drugs, unexpected benefits of off-label applications, and stubborn diseases that may only respond to therapies that are far too expensive to be included on a payer’s optimal treatment list.
This can be challenging for patients, providers, and for pharmaceutical companies, which may struggle to bring effective innovations to market if insurers won’t cover them. “Since these treatment pathways are designed to offer the best course of treatment for 80% to 90% of patients with the corresponding form of cancer, drugs that aren’t on pathways will be challenged to gain market share,” said Denis Goldenberg, vice president of oncology market research at Healthcare Research & Analytics (HRA), a market research consulting practice.
In a new report, HRA found that drug manufacturers fear being shut out of the standardized clinical pathway ecosystem if they routinely offer pricy therapies regardless of their effectiveness. They are also unlikely to be pleased with the fact that standard pathways reduce the influence of pharmaceutical companies on physician decision-making: if a clinician is being paid the same for using a generic or competing product, pharmaceutical companies lose their leverage when they attempt to sway prescribers towards their own goods.
While that might be a big benefit for medical ethics, what happens when drug makers succeed in developing an innovative therapy, but high prices make leery payers turn up their noses? The shocking price tag of Sovaldi, the 95% effective hepatitis C drug that costs $1000 per day, is one such example. The 12-week course has a high failure rate for patients who discontinue their treatment, making it risky for payers to take on the bad debt of paying for half a prescription that will not rid beneficiaries of the virus.   Despite its effectiveness, Sovaldi is unlikely to find its way onto a standardized clinical pathway until cheaper, quicker, and lower-risk versions of the drug are released to the public. In the meantime, patients that could benefit from the life-changing medication may not be receiving the optimal treatment for their condition.
READ MORE: FDA Holds App-a-Thon for Precision Medicine, Next-Gen Genomics
The effectiveness of standardized clinical pathways might depend on how agile they turn out to be when brought to scale. Payers are not generally known for their flexibility when it comes to making exceptions for patients, but the expansion of big data analytics in the research community and the pharmaceutical industry could help to speed the development of truly effective pathways by picking out hidden advantages of drugs that are already in wide circulation.
One study at Vanderbilt University Medical Center found that metformin, a very common treatment option for diabetics, may impact cancer survival rates for patients with and without the metabolic disease. The study leveraged EHR data and large-scale informatics to detect the positive impact of metformin in unexpected places. “With the future ubiquity of available EHR data, such data mining may provide an important tool for drug repurposing, pharmacovigilance, and comparative effectiveness research,” the authors said.
With pharmaceutical manufacturers desperate to cut down on the billions of dollars they pour into drug development every year – a process with an enormous rate of failure and wasted cash – big data analytics could be the key to making standardized clinical pathways into a useful tool for research instead of a brick wall in front of the road to innovation. Pharmaceuticals will need to achieve a very high level of value if they are to be included in a bundled payment arrangement, which puts the burden on developers to only offer the safest, most effective, and most cost-efficient products for a payer’s consideration.
Clinical pathways are gaining momentum, but are not yet in such wide use as to be detrimental for the vast majority of patients suffering complicated diseases that fall out of the norm. If evidence-based medicine is used as intended, those outliers will never be negatively impacted by the standardization of care. Big data analytics is speeding the process of conducting clinical trials, and a heightened focus on precision medicine and greater public involvement in medical research providers more opportunities to test novel therapies in an increasingly targeted way, inclusion in a standardized clinical pathway should turn into a coveted goal instead of a roadblock.
As the healthcare reimbursement landscape morphs into a system that rewards value and quality above all else, pharmaceutical companies and clinicians will need to balance the needs of the many with the costs of the few. Standardized clinical pathways offer a promising avenue for reducing unnecessary expenses and cutting unwelcome variations in care, but their expansion into the mainstream payment system will need to be carefully managed in order to avoid stifled innovation and a lack of access to sticker-shock therapies that may nevertheless produce beneficial outcomes.
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient Care


