Should Alzheimer’s rank as third leading cause of death?

March 11, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 11, 2014 - Alzheimer’s Disease may be having a bigger impact on population health than previously estimated, says a new report from the American Academy of Neurology (AAN), which suggests that the dementia condition actually ranks third on the list of leading causes of deaths among Americans rather than sixth.  Research into the disease is becoming increasingly urgent as the financial burden on the health system and the families of millions of aging seniors continues to grow, but AAN warns that providers can’t just look to death certificates in order to determine the impact of the degenerative cognitive impairment.
The Centers for Disease Control currently lists Alzheimer’s behind heart disease, cancer, chronic lung disease, stroke, and accidents as a national cause of death.  But a team from the Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center in Chicago studied more than 2500 people for nearly a decade, monitoring the progress of the disease and plotting it against the official cause of death listed on their death certificates.  They found that while many patients suffered a deterioration of their health due to the cognitive disease, their death certificates only reflected the immediate cause of death, such as pneumonia.
“Death certificates may not be the best way to measure how many people die from something that takes up to 10 years” to seriously impact the physical workings of the body, said lead author Bryan James to the Washington Post. “We’re not saying they didn’t die of those [immediate causes] we’re just saying, ‘Well, what put them in the hospital with that condition?’  Trying to identify a single cause of death in elderly people is often not reflective of the real situation.”
“There are many people who still think of Alzheimer’s disease as just a memory problem — you forgot where you left your keys. But currently, Alzheimer’s is a universally fatal brain disease that has kind of fallen by the radar,” asserts Keith Fargo, director of Scientific Programs and Outreach at the Alzheimer’s Association.  “If we have the right kind of [research funding] investment as a country, then we will be able to make strides similar to what we’ve made in heart disease, HIV and cancer.”
Dig Deeper
Cancer Mortality Rates See 20% Drop, but Disparities Remain
Regional Variation Points Out Value of Antibiotic Stewardship
Six Pediatric Hospitals Create Personalized Medicine Coalition
The Alzheimer’s Association would like to see an increase in government and public funding for research into the disease, but progress may be happening in any case.  A group of researchers from Georgetown University believe they have recently uncovered a significant breakthrough with a blood test that can predict the likelihood of developing the disease, giving seniors more time to plan for their long-term care and make arrangements.
While the accuracy of the test is still questionable, the researchers say that a serious of ten blood biomarkers can distinguish seniors over the age of 70 who developed Alzheimer’s from those who did not, giving physicians a clue into the biological basis for the condition. “We consider our results a major step toward the commercialization of a preclinical disease biomarker test that could be useful for large-scale screening to identify at-risk individuals,” said Howard J. Federoff, MD, PhD.
Tagged Healthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


