“Bundled” diabetes care produces better outcomes quickly

June 27, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 27, 2014 - Coupling a comprehensive system of chronic disease management for diabetics with other elements of primary care can improve patient health and produce significant results, says Geisinger Health System.  Since Type 2 diabetes rarely occurs in isolation from other serious health risk factors, such as hypertension and obesity, looking beyond the immediate disease can boost quality of life and outcomes for diabetic patients.  The key to encouraging better health lay in reorganizing primary care providers into a coordinated care team driven by “all-or-nothing” incentives, writes Thomas Graf, MD, Chief Medical Officer for Population Health at Geisinger and an author of the study published in the American Journal of Managed Care.
Incidences of diabetes mellitus have increased 40% between 2007 and 2010, affecting more than 11% of the adult population and more than 25% of people 65 or older.  Since these patients are at significant risk of complications such as blindness, amputations, heart attack and stroke, managing more than blood sugar levels is critical to ensure long-term health, Graf says.  To combat the growing risks, Geisinger created its Diabetes System, which included decision support for nurses and medical assistants, patient report cards, and a series of nine measures that providers had to meet with each patient.  Incentives for the care team were disbursed only if all nine measures were adequately met, which encouraged the providers to be thorough in their screenings, tests, and services.
“By doing this bundled management and improving this reliable diabetes system of care, we improved patients’ outcomes – not just their numbers, but their health outcomes – in three years,” Graf said. The risks of heart attack, stroke, and retinopathy were significantly lower among patients who took part in the program versus those who received typical primary care, with results appearing as quickly as 12 months into the program.
“This study is important because if a health system or health plan is going to invest in this system, they want to know the benefits of those investments,” Graf said, but he noted that implementing the system did not require additional staff members on hand.  “We just redesigned the roles and responsibilities within the primary care office to have the staff work more together as a team to help the patients accomplish their goals,” he said. “In this team-based model, the physician is still in charge as the quarterback of the team, but this system uses other team members to perform other tasks so the physician can focus on making complex medical decisions and motivate the patients to meet their goals.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


