ACOs recognize role of big data, but analytics remain elusive

September 25, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 25, 2014 - Accountable care organizations (ACOs) have been highly successful at bringing population health management and outcomes-based care to millions of patients across the nation, but they still continue to face health IT challenges that prohibit the use of clinical analytics at its fullest, says a new study by the eHealth Initiative and Premier, Inc.  Despite the transformative role of health IT in the way ACOs deliver care, bringing analytics and population health technologies to scale is a costly and complicated proposition that will take many more years to accomplish.
Of the 62 ACOs participating in the survey, the majority were large and mature organizations, which further highlights the difficulties of integrating analytics into the ACO model.  While 86% of the organizations were live on an EHR and 68% had a working data warehouse, just 28% had a master patient index or a revenue cycle management system.  Fifty-eight percent use clinical decision support, and three-quarters have a disease registry.
When it comes to patient-facing technologies that foster engagement and support population health management, the findings are mixed.  Ninety-four percent have a tethered patient web portal to allow online access to records and help meet the requirements of Stage 2 meaningful use, and 61% can provide patient notifications and reminders.  However, just 33% allow self-service appointment scheduling, and only about a quarter can harness remote monitoring and telemedicine.  A mere 15% use smartphone apps for patient engagement.
Even though 88% of ACOs believe that robust analytics are a requirement for success, they are having a difficult time breaking down data siloes that prevent them from drawing analytics information from a rich variety of sources.  The vast majority of ACOs can use clinical EHR data and post-adjudicated claims data to perform calculations on their patient population, but only 37% of ACOs harness data from a state or disease registry, and less than a quarter can analyze information from a health information exchange or remote monitoring device.
Dig Deeper
Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
Population Health Management, Big Data Markets Set to Grow
Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Applications Close Sept. 15
“As one might intuit, larger and more mature ACOs are likely to collect data from various platforms and sources,” the report says. “However, as ACOs pull data from more sources, they also report lower abilities to leverage their health IT infrastructure to support care coordination, patient engagement, physician payment and contract adjudication, population health management and quality measurement. Without seamless or frictionless access to information, ACOs report significant challenges with integrating technology (88%) and analytics (83%) into workflow.”
Data quality and liquidity are also among the top challenges experienced by analytics-minded ACOs, while more than 80% blame fragmented and conflicting quality measures spread across myriad federal programs for their slow progress towards truly accountable care.  Organizations also report challenges related to cost, interoperability, a lack of trained staff to work with data, and workflow integration.
Nonetheless, these organizations have made significant improvements in quality, patient safety, and efficiency using what they have.  Health IT infrastructure has helped two-thirds of organizations improve their clinical quality and preventative screening rates, and more than half improve their chronic disease management, patient outcomes, and hospital readmission rates.  The only area where health IT has hurt more than it helped, according to the survey, is in the area of patient satisfaction.
“In only a few short years, the adoption of EHRs and HIT tools has had a profound impact on healthcare organizations,” the report concludes. “Today, ACOs are integrating electronic health data from disparate systems and settings into workflows to drive actionable insights and achieve the Triple Aim. However, to successfully use analytics, leaders must navigate difficult barriers such as interoperability, high costs and analytically oriented staff.”
“Results from the 2014 ACO survey suggest that although many organizations are well on their way to advanced stages of operation and adequately achieving accountable care goals, ACO leadership should develop a scalable – and sustainable – long-term health IT plan that targets specific organizational objectives, problems and challenges.”
Tagged Accountable CareClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


