ONC Health IT Interoperability Plan Gathers Fractious Comments

May 19, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 19, 2015 - As the healthcare industry moves into the meatier stages of the EHR Incentive Programs, the Office of the National Coordinator has shifted its focus from health IT adoption to health IT interoperability.  After laying out its vision for a seamless, nationwide ecosystem of health information exchange in January with a new blueprint for the learning health system called Connecting Health and Care for the Nation: A Shared Nationwide Interoperability Roadmap, the ONC opened itself up to public comment on its plan for widespread data exchange.
The comment period closed on April 3 with a total of 250 remarks from advocacy groups, technology vendors, professional societies, and individuals who expressed their opinions, deep concerns, and strong support for various aspects of the health IT interoperability framework. 
In their responses, many healthcare stakeholders questioned the ability of the roadmap to truly guide the industry towards a level of health IT interoperability that could meaningfully lower costs and improve outcomes. 
Has the ONC hit the mark with its initial take on linking patient data across the care continuum?  Below are some of the major themes that emerged from the open comment period.
Can patient data remain private and secure?
READ MORE: As FHIR Matures, Healthcare Interoperability Comes into Focus
Patient privacy and security is a chronic concern for the healthcare system as more and more information moves into electronic databases vulnerable to hacking and unauthorized access.  As providers exchange more data through larger pipelines, sufficient oversight and adherence to HIPAA regulations may be increasingly hard to maintain, many commenters pointed out.
“I guarantee that the database system you intend to build, regardless of your intentions for security, will be compromised,” warned Wayne Johnson a retired senior project manager. “Unlawful access to the private medical information stored in the system will be achieved. There is no such thing as an absolutely secure networked system.  Sufficiently motivated individuals, organizations, or governments -- including domestic political operatives -- will gain access to any or all information stored in the system. All of its data is vulnerable to being stolen or manipulated. It’s that simple.”
Others put more faith in the basic infrastructure building blocks that enable health IT interoperability, but believe that current privacy and security frameworks are not sufficient to address the increased strain of widespread health information exchange.
“The Roadmap does an excellent job of outlining the obvious need to update and modernize HIPAA and cyber security rules to match the great technological progress and cultural changes that have occurred since HIPAA, and even HITECH, were enacted,” Health IT Now said in its comments. “We believe that, with incentives, technology and data resources can be leveraged to speed treatments and cures to patients in a safe and secure manner.”
“Therefore, Health IT Now calls for a new nationwide framework and asks that ONC: (1) identify where HIPAA is and is not working; and (2) develop the context for a new law that will better protect privacy and the use of data in a more uniform, preemptive fashion,” the organization added.
READ MORE: What Healthcare IT Users Don’t Really Need to Know about FHIR
The HIMSS EHR Association (EHRA) agreed that the focus on standard protocols like RESTful, FHIR, and other API tools required a new look at how patient data is secured.  “We need clarity on the scope of the privacy and security protections intended,” EHRA said. “The reference to ‘learning health system’ and introducing RESTful application programming interface (API) services imply a significant increase in the scope of the interoperability model to include a very broad spectrum of healthcare information systems, including consumer devices.”
Epic Systems suggests that healthcare organizations place a higher priority on the encryption of access devices in order to deter malicious attacks and reduce the likelihood of unauthorized access to data when a portable device is misplaced.  “Encryption of devices that are often lost or stolen, such as laptops or mobile device, is an effective strategy,” the EHR developer said in its comments. “Encryption of servers in a secure data center, that are unlikely to be physically stolen, would offer less protection than comparable investments to avoid intrusion with trusted credentials (spear phishing).”
Adoption of data standards may not be as simple as it sounds
FHIR may be the poster child for health IT data standards at the moment, but retooling the industry’s massive investments in infrastructure to embrace open architecture will require more than a gentle push from the ONC.  Healthcare providers must be subject to strong data governance principles while receiving enough motivation and incentives to build momentum towards a meaningful transition. 
“Proper, sustained governance of standards remains a pre-requisite for effective interoperability, even with new technologies such as Open APIs,” wrote IHE International. “We believe that ONC can incentivize the process by convening and working with the diverse stakeholders in health IT and communicating clear and consistent direction on national priorities such as the learning health system. When appropriate, ONC should act as a convener and an active participant in these groups. ONC has a key role to ensure that standards selection process follows transparent, objective, and neutral processes.”
READ MORE: ONC Views APIs as Key to Health Data Exchange, Interoperability
The ONC must also understand that healthcare providers, many of whom feel as if they have not achieved sufficient return on investment from their EHR implementations, may be slow to adopt new technologies that have not been sufficiently tested and piloted.
“Standards must include well-defined use cases, detailed technical specifications and then higher-level implementation guides (such as IHE profiles) that identify policies and deployment architectures for production use,” states the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA). “Furthermore, standards and implementation guides must be piloted before they can be effective at the national level. These considerations should be addressed in the ONC roadmap.”
The Advisory Board Company, meanwhile, advocates more of a tough love approach for those organizations that fall behind the curve.  “We believe that technical support to facilitate improvements could be paired with penalties for those who disrupt the constructive and appropriate flow of information,” the organization said. “Ultimately, this type of broad-based approach to interoperability presents the best opportunity to generate enough momentum to rapidly drive the technology advancements needed to keep pace with the health system transformation underway.”
Is the health IT interoperability roadmap too light on the details?
Healthcare stakeholders have consistently criticized federal guidance efforts for being too pie-in-the-sky for the majority of provider organizations still struggling with the very basics of EHR use, and the health IT interoperability roadmap is not an exception, several commenters said.
“We would recommend that ONC first and foremost focus its efforts on specific issues that transcend the various models that exist,” urged Surescripts.  “We believe that the broader health IT community should identify the specific capabilities which require uniformity at the national-level and coordinate and build consensus around those issues.  ONC must be clear as to what and who would be governed, and cannot disadvantage some to the benefit of others. We believe that ONC should identify specific and focused issues that are so core and fundamental to nationwide interoperability that they lend themselves to one governance model.”
IHE International agreed.  “We believe the Roadmap should identify a more detailed sequence of activities to address interoperability priorities, from standards development through piloting, reference implementations and training,” the organization said. “Keeping in mind the natural sequencing and interdependencies of these activities will help the roadmap achieve optimal deployment and adoption.”
The ONC must provide healthcare organizations with more hands-on information for the adoption of data standards and other new technologies, stakeholders insisted.  “A key example where a more detailed process and timeline is needed is in the implementation of HL7 FHIR, which is listed in the roadmap for immediate adoption,” said RSNA.  “ONC should instead take into account the full standards maturation process to determine when any new technology is ready for use.”
The Oregon Health Authority added to the chorus of organizations hoping for a little more meat on the bone.  “We believe that there is space within the Roadmap to further clarify the coordination and facilitation role of ONC and how it relates to the different activities and diverse stakeholders,” they said.  “It would be good for there to be further delineation of roles and broad scopes of responsibility, and a strengthening of the role of States in furthering interoperability.”
Most stakeholders will struggle with ambitious timelines for execution
Providers aren’t the only ones who may experience a time crunch when it comes to the ONC’s vision for health IT interoperability.  With 2020 as the target for a nearly complete revolution in the way healthcare organizations rely on data for clinical analytics, population health management, care coordination, and medical research, vendors may not be able to develop or deploy new technologies in a timeframe that fits the government’s expectations.
Different components of the overall health IT interoperability landscape are currently at differing levels of sophistication, Epic pointed out.  “Our experience is that these workflows have widely varying levels of standards maturity and adoption,” the company wrote. “For example, e-prescribing is standardized and widely used across the country, while PDMP drug monitoring systems are not standardized and have significant variance across databases. Each workflow should be evaluated against the current state for consideration on an appropriate timeframe.”
Health IT vendors still catching their breath from the race to get certified for Stage 2 meaningful use may have difficulty with rapidly increasing requirements related to their products, said Cerner Corporation.  “The cycle time of the introduction of new criteria editions and their impacts on vendor and client timeframes for development and deployment need to adequately account for…activities beyond the obvious activities of gap assessment, design, software coding, testing and rollout for upgrade/update,” the company said, pointing out that vendors must have the opportunity to test the usability of their health IT components and the impact of their products on the clinical workflow.
“We recognize that a steady criticism has been of certified systems being technically able to meet testing requirements but not being very usable,” Cerner acknowledges. “Part of that stems from a compression of time to get the requirement met which makes it difficult to do a full job of human factors review, and accounting for usability design - measurement requirements can be challenging to fold in without an adequate cycle of that kind of review.”
Providers must also be given time to roll out and optimize their infrastructure in-house if they are to successfully work on connecting with other providers and achieving true health IT interoperability across the care continuum while balancing competing initiatives like meaningful use and ICD-10, Cerner added.
Detailed guidance, strong data governance, and reasonable expectations will be the key to making nationwide health information exchange and interoperability a reality, the majority of respondents concluded, and the ONC’s health IT interoperability framework is just the first step in a long journey towards developing the technological infrastructure to support a truly seamless care experience for patients and their providers.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsHealth Information ExchangeInteroperability


