AMA, Intermountain Form Real-Time Data Partnership for Diabetes

July 27, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 27, 2016 - The American Medical Association, Intermountain Healthcare, and Omada Health have announced a new data-driven chronic disease management and prevention program aimed at reducing the incidence of Type 2 diabetes. 
The patient-centered program focuses on improving patient education and self-management skills as a way to encourage healthy lifestyle choices and forestall the development of diabetes.
"This collaboration expands upon the AMA's robust efforts to prevent type 2 diabetes in this country through the scalable adoption of proven innovative tools and resources that can help physicians better manage patients with chronic conditions," said AMA President Andrew W. Gurman, MD.
The AMA has made diabetes prevention and management one of its top advocacy priorities, and has invested in several different strategies for cutting the financial, clinical, and social burdens of the metabolic condition.
Dig Deeper
Finding the Value in the IoT, Patient-Generated Health Data
Partnership Offers Chronic Disease Management at Pharmacies
$335K Grant Supports Chronic Disease Management for Lupus
These activities include previous partnerships with the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the White House, as well as grant opportunities for clinics with innovative ideas about helping patients manage their individual needs.
The AMA has also been a vocal proponent of the National Diabetes Prevention Program, which is the first codified, proven chronic disease management initiative approved for Medicare reimbursement. 
"With one out of three people at risk of developing type 2 diabetes in their lifetime and at increased risk for serious health problems such as stroke and heart attack, we will continue to do everything we can to significantly decrease the number of American adults who develop the disease,” Gurman added.
Between fifteen and thirty percent of patients with elevated blood sugar will develop full-blown Type 2 diabetes at some point during their lifetime, yet the vast majority of prediabetics have no idea that they are at risk. 
The new partnership with Intermountain and Omada Health, a provider of online patient engagement and management technologies, will allow care providers at Intermountain to monitor their patients’ progress through a digital diabetes management program. 
Access to real-time data from the system will help clinicians tailor chronic disease management and prevention strategies to individual patients based on their unique needs, successes, and opportunities for improvement.
"Research shows that participation in evidence-based diabetes prevention programs can cut the risk of developing type 2 diabetes by nearly 60 percent," said Gurman. "Online technology such as Omada's program will help Intermountain physicians and care teams stay connected with their patients as they take proactive steps outside of the clinical setting to prevent type 2 diabetes.
“By bridging this gap, treatment touch-points with patients over the course of their time in the online program can be more meaningful and impactful, which we believe is a win for both patients and their providers."
Intermountain Healthcare clinicians are looking forward to the ability to provide even more personalized care to the thousands of patients struggling with diabetes, added Elizabeth Joy, MD, MPH, Medical Director for Community Health and Clinical Nutrition. Close to 115,000 patients in Intermountain’s service area alone may be living with prediabetes.
"The addition of Omada to Intermountain's diabetes prevention program will expand patient access to a CDC-recognized program. We anticipate that access to the Omada program will enhance patient engagement and improve health outcomes," she said.
This is the first time the AMA has worked with a digital healthcare provider to help guide high-risk patients into a lifestyle management program, the press release noted.
"We're delighted to be partnering with the country's premier physician organization and one of the most innovative health systems in the United States," said Omada Health CEO Sean Duffy.
"Intermountain's integration of the Omada program, and AMA's focus on ensuring digital tools work to empower providers will give patients with prediabetes another proven option to meet their care needs. It will also give physicians and their care teams additional treatment options, and actionable data to better understand how to deliver lasting lifestyle change for those in need of it."
Tagged Alabama Medicaid AgencyChronic Disease ManagementEHR and Patient EngagementPopulation Health Management


