CMS: 1% of docs account for 14% of Medicare billings

April 09, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 09, 2014 - When it comes to healthcare spending, much of the focus has been on chronically ill patients.  The commonly cited statistic that 20% of patients account for 80% of costs may be concerning, but equally noteworthy is the small number of physicians consuming an enormous proportion of Medicare reimbursements.  Even as the healthcare industry struggles to control costs and increase transparency to allow patients to make better care choices and businesses to make more intelligent decisions, CMS has been loath to release its reimbursement data to the public.  The newly available data from 2012 shows that some physicians are consistently receiving hefty checks even when fraud is not suspected.
The top 1% of the 825,000 individual providers included in the data have received 14% of the $77 billion in billings recorded during the 2012 fiscal year.  Additionally, 344 individual providers received more than $3 million each, with the 1000 top-grossing doctors scooping up $3.05 billion in reimbursements, the Wall Street Journal reports.  Ophthalmologists and radiation oncologists made up a significant proportion of the most highly paid providers.
While supporters of the move to make CMS data public applauded the efforts at pricing transparency, other experts worry that the statistics will be taken out of context, sensationalize the outliers, or unfairly pin blame on innocent providers. “What we don’t want to happen here is that patients be misinformed by raw data,” said Ardis Dee Hoven, president of the AMA. “At the end of the day, what we need in this country is data that shows value, and this data isn’t going to show value.”
“MGMA is troubled about the potential for unintended consequences as a result of the release of this type of data and the effect it may have on Medicare beneficiaries,” said MGMA President and CEO Susan Turney, MD, MS, PACP, FACMPE, in a public statement. “This release could result in patients making decisions about their care based on faulty assumptions about physicians. Claims data are not a proxy for quality, especially when provided in isolation, from a single payer.”
Dig Deeper
Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
How Big Data Analytics Can Improve Patient Utilization Rates
For providers, however, the data simply illustrates what many have already known: Medicare patients are expensive, and many procedures focused on the senior citizen population, including services like cataract surgery, treatments for macular degeneration, or cancer care, can be complicated and costly.
CMS, for its part, is putting a brave face on the release of information. “We look forward to making this important, new information available so that consumers, Medicare and other payers can get the best value for their health-care dollar,” said Jonathan Blum, principal deputy administrator for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Tagged Financial AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data AnalyticsHospital QualityMedicarePatient Care


