EHRs Must Be Integrated Tools for Chronic Disease Management

May 04, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 04, 2015 - Healthcare providers must learn how to leverage EHR infrastructure more effectively for chronic disease management  if they wish to tackle population health management problems such as improving hypertension control, ONC Chief Medical Officer Thomas A. Mason, MD and Million Hearts Executive Director Janet Wright, MD, FACC write in a new Health IT Buzz blog post. 
With more than 67 million Americans suffering with high blood pressure, a condition that significantly increases risk for a variety of other deadly diseases, healthcare providers must increase the use of health IT infrastructure, including EHRs and clinical analytics, to bolster population health management programs such as the Million Hearts initiative that hope to reduce heart attacks and strokes.
“The Department of Health and Human Services, through its national Million Hearts initiative, has set a goal to prevent 1 million heart attacks and strokes by 2017,” say Mason and Wright. “Million Hearts is working with providers to reach clinical targets that could improve population health. For example, health care providers are encouraged to have 70 percent or more of their patients with hypertension control their blood pressure, which could be done by self-monitoring.”
Million Hearts encourages providers to use existing electronic clinical quality measure (eCQM) data collected during participation in the EHR Incentive Programs to gauge their hypertension control efforts and patient outcomes.  While the initiative recently recognized a record number of healthcare providers who had demonstrated measurable progress towards these goals, chronic disease management for hypertension patients continues to be a challenge for the healthcare system as a whole. 
The meaningful use of EHRs, in conjunction with focused advocacy programs like Million Hearts, can be an important part of changing the status quo, the ONC says.  New research from the CDC, published in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, shows that participation in meaningful use alone did not significantly increase the average proportion of patients with controlled hypertension from its baseline levels of 63 percent.  Despite increasing enrollment in the EHR Incentive Programs, the number of providers selecting the option clinical quality measures related to hypertension control remained steady, the CDC says, and so did the clinical performance of those providers.
READ MORE: Artificial Intelligence a “Low Priority” for Healthcare Orgs in 2018
Yet 36 percent providers who chose to participate in the Million Hearts initiative have been able to achieve the program’s 70 percent hypertension control threshold.  These providers may take advantage of resources from the American Heart Association, the CDC, and published academic research to inform and educate both clinicians and patients about the importance of lifestyle changes, medications, and other methods of improving blood pressure control.
“The findings show that an EHR is a tool that should make providing better health care easier, but it cannot do so in isolation,” write Mason and Wright. “Health IT is on the quality team, which means that patient-centered, team-based approaches to care, coupled with the use of certified health IT, can move the health system towards meeting the very important Million Hearts targets. These strategies should also help clinicians guide patients to achieve safe blood pressures and avoid preventable death and disability.”
EHR-based chronic disease management strategies rely on improved health information exchange and health data interoperability, the ONC says, as well as a focus on data integrity and integration.  EHR data locked away as free text in clinical notes or patient-generated health data that is not available for analysis within the EHR represent significant missed opportunities for providers to leverage meaningful health data for better diagnoses and treatment.
“We heard consistent themes across the high-performing practices and health plans we interviewed. One was the importance of good data, and analysis of the data to identify gaps and areas for improvement,” says a report outlining the importance of integrating health IT and clinical analytics into the population health management programs of Million Hearts Champions, a growing group of providers who have achieved their hypertension goals.
“An emphasis on population health management through analysis of available data—claims, clinical data and administrative data. [Successful providers] told us it is important to have up-to-date information and the ability to use these data to drill down at the regional, practice and patient levels.”
READ MORE: How Big Data Velocity Informs Population Health, Patient Safety
Providers must improve their access to integrated, interoperable data sources if they are to make the best possible use of their EHRs and other data analytics infrastructure.  “To reach a level of care coordination necessary to promote better health – and in this case to help address a patient’s high blood pressure – the entire health system must move towards an interoperable, learning health system,” the blog post says. “The exchange and use of electronic information by all health care providers on the care team is necessary to improve health and health care while decreasing costs.”
“We still have work to do,” Wright and Mason conclude. “To continue to make progress to achieve this goal for more patients, we must work together to reach an interoperable health system that facilitates information exchange across the care continuum, and that enables care transformation.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


