How Big Data Leads to Precision Population Health Management

March 28, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 28, 2016 - While the concept of population health management focuses on creating relatively large cohorts of patients in need of a specific set of services, the ultimate aim of taking a macro view of patient care is to develop a highly personalized experience.
It may seem contradictory, but healthcare organizations that work on implementing the technologies, data analytics, and workflow processes required for population health management will be setting themselves up to deliver a precision experience for patients, says John Glaser, Senior Vice President of Population Health and Global Strategy at Cerner Corporation.
Providers will need to learn how to coordinate care for patients on an individual basis if they wish to successfully navigate the rocky transition to value-based reimbursements and accountable care.
The key to doing so is achieving equilibrium between people, processes, and technology while keeping the patient at the center of reform efforts.  If providers can find this balance point within their own organizations, they will be able to deliver high quality, tailored care at a price point that the healthcare system can afford.
“We’re going through very profound business model changes in healthcare right now, and obviously providers are targeting areas of their care processes that will help them with the transition from volume to value and with reducing costs,” Glaser told HealthITAnalytics.com. 
“Any time you have change of this magnitude in an industry, it’s disruptive and full of uncertainty.”
CMS is hoping to hit the value-based reimbursement tipping point in just two short years, which leaves providers with little time to reinvent themselves to meet the challenges of accountable care.
“There is a variety of skills and capabilities that organizations need to have but might not have developed yet,” Glaser said.  “These organizations might have never managed populations before.  They may be very familiar with providing acute care, but not understand the full spectrum of what comes after that for the patient.”
As a vendor of health IT tools, Cerner acknowledges its responsibility to help providers develop the skills they need to use big data analytics and population health management strategies to their full advantage. 
For Glaser, who will be leading the company’s population health management initiatives starting in April, that means taking a multi-pronged approach to developing a patient experience that draws on both sides of the equation: using big data analytics to flag opportunities for better care, and then taking a tailored and personalized approach to helping those patients maintain their health.
“You can’t treat all diabetics the same way, because they’re not all on an equal footing,” he said.  “Some have great motivation and some don’t.  Some come from situations where it’s really hard to change a high-fat diet.  Some have good health literacy and some don’t.”
Understanding those variables, as well as socioeconomic challenges that may impact a patient’s health, can help to generate insights into a patient’s needs that may not be evident from a clinical record.
“I was recently taking to some colleagues about pediatric emergency department use,” Glaser recalled. “They told me that the number one factor for children to come into the ED with a respiratory crisis situation is the age of the mattress the child is sleeping on.  Because if that mattress is old, it’s full of dust and mites and all these other things that the child is inhaling every night, and that exacerbates their condition.”
Correlating the age of mattresses with asthmatic ED visits could help providers make suggestions to parents and deliver better preventative care on an individualized basis, but there’s just one problem. Glaser says.
“How do I get mattress data?  Older mattresses are associated with poverty, so maybe I can use economic status as a proxy for that.  It might be as good as I can get.  But even if I can develop a workable data set about mattresses, how can I determine that it was the mattress that brought the child into the ED?  If I’m sitting at a dashboard trying to do analytics, how do I know what pieces of data matter?” 
Providers and developers have been trying to aggregate enough big data to answer that question.  Claims, EHR data, patient-generated health data, community information, and public health data can be combined to craft detailed, real-time portraits of patients and their interactions with their environments. 
But good data is only one piece of the puzzle, Glaser points out.  The bigger challenge may be how to integrate all of these insights into the care continuum in a meaningful way.
“We need tools that fit into the workflow of the physician or the care manager or the nurse to help them make sure that they are on top of the people they’re responsible for,” he said.  “These tools have to help them address a variety of situations.”
Healthcare organizations have been struggling with this complex task, partly because the entire problem of population health management seems like a catch-22.  Providers need quality IT tools and good data to understand how to manage patients, but good data comes from organizations that have efficient workflow processes and useful health IT tools already in place.
The trick to developing both competencies is to view processes and technology as synergistic partners, not as tasks to be completed in a specific, isolated order.
“Depending on the stage of your evolution, you emphasize one over the other, and it can bounce back and forth,” he said.  “It’s hard to get a clinical staff motivated until there’s data in front of them showing them that they might not be doing such a good job in one area, or their performance is uneven.”
“You have to have data just to start the conversation, especially if you’re starting to move into value-based reimbursement and realizing that you might not have the potential to fare very well.”
“From there, you can use the data to pinpoint areas for improvement, like helping patients quit smoking or managing diabetics,” he continued.  “Then you start looking at what processes you need to make all this happen.  So the data shifts you into the other side of the conversation, and helps you divide up who does what for population health management.”
Once the organization understands how to address the problem, they must turn to big data again if they wish to take action.
“Your physicians might say, ‘Well, I can lean on smokers more heavily, but you have to tell me who I should be talking to.”’  And then you need data again,” Glaser said.  “You need the tools to help do those things.”
“So you have to focus on both sides based on where you are in this evolution.  The tools will dominate in some phases, and in others, it will be more about the processes and clinical transformation.”
Moving back and forth through this cycle of improvement will allow organizations to maximize the benefits of population health management by targeting services to the patients who need it most. 
Using big data analytics as a firm foundation for these efforts will give clinicians and care managers the insight they need to a patient’s specific situation, allowing them to create a precision experience that leverages an individual’s strengths and overcomes their weaknesses.
“We start with what we can start with, which is bringing data together from EHRs and claims, and make that as good as we can,” said Glaser.  “That will help us take big, big steps forward with developing a composite clinical picture.  Over time, we will have to refine that.  The precision experience doesn’t happen overnight.  It’s an evolution.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsInterviewsPopulation Health Management


