Do mammogram screenings do more harm than good for patients?

February 12, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 12, 2014 - The conventional wisdom in medicine is that you can’t treat effectively what you don’t catch early, and breast cancer is no exception.  As the second most common cancer affecting women and the second most common cause of death, fighting the disease has been a major focus for researchers, clinicians, and the public for many years.  Mammograms are the standard screening tool for breast cancer, and current guidelines recommend routine screenings for women over fifty every two years.  However, the results from a large-scale study running for the past 25 years casts doubts on the necessity and effectiveness of frequent mammograms, which may produce false positives and cause women to take drastic surgical action unnecessarily.
Published in the British Medical Journal, a report by researchers from Toronto, Canada followed nearly 90,000 women over a quarter of a century and found that death rates from breast cancer were remarkably similar regardless of whether or not women aged 40 to 59 received an annual mammogram for five years or not.  The women in the control group still received annual physical exams from their care providers but did not undergo imaging tests.  During the study, 3250 women in the mammogram cohort and 3133 women in the control group were diagnosed with cancer.  Five hundred women in the mammogram group later died, compared to 505 deaths in the control group.
Additionally, the team found that 22% of cancers detected by mammogram were over-diagnosed, meaning that a lump or tumor was detected and treated with chemotherapy, surgery, or radiation despite the cancer posing no significant threat to the patient’s health.  One in every 424 women received this unnecessary treatment, which calls into question the true usefulness of a test that has been credited by many cancer patients as a life-saver.
The results conflict with provider efforts to increase screenings as a way to identify and mitigate expensive and dangerous conditions before they impose too heavily on the healthcare system.  But with the harm and benefit of mammograms turning out to be relatively equal in this study, many experts are starting to wonder if providers should look for savings by reducing the number of unnecessary screenings, too.
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Cancer Mortality Rates See 20% Drop, but Disparities Remain
Top 5 Collaborative Tasks for Population Management, Public Health
Some providers are turning to genetic analysis and risk calculators to flag patients who will benefit from a watchful eye while letting other women avoid the test.  “Genomics is the new frontier of cancer research,” says Lyndsay Harris, MD, study investigator and Director, Breast Cancer Program, UH Seidman Cancer Center and Professor of Medicine at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine. “The ability to understand potential clinical outcomes for patients earlier in the treatment process would provide physicians with better opportunity to personalize patients’ medicines according to their own tumor responses.”
Women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene expressions have long been encouraged to take action sooner than those without the heightened risk, but for the rest of the patient population, the decision to get regular mammograms has been complicated by a split in expert opinions that this most recent study will do nothing to heal. “The mammography story is just not such an easy story,” said Dr. Juni, a clinical epidemiologist at the University of Bern, to the New York Times.
“It will make women uncomfortable, and they should be uncomfortable,” added Dr. Russell P. Harris, a professor of medicine at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, who was not involved in the study. “The decision to have a mammogram should not be a slam dunk.”
The American Cancer Society has convened an expert panel to review the findings of the Canadian study and other research that has recently come to light in order to reformulate its guidelines based on the latest evidence.  A greater reliance on genetic screens and the current use of medicines like tamoxifen that reduce the cancer death rate has made mammograms a little less important, some say, and the risk of unnecessary treatments based on questionable diagnoses should factor in to the decision.
Because the scientific rationale to recommend screening or not does not differ noticeably between breast and prostate cancer, political pressure and beliefs might have a role,” says an accompanying editorial. “As time goes by, we do indeed need more efficient mechanisms to reconsider priorities and recommendations for mammography screening and other medical interventions.  We agree that the rationale for screening by mammography be urgently reassessed by policy makers.”
Tagged Big DataHealthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient CarePopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


