How Georgia Tech Trains Healthcare Data Analytics Scientists

October 06, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 06, 2014 - Well-trained healthcare data analytics scientists versed in the complexities of healthcare can be hard to find.  Even as the healthcare industry joins a slew of other fields in its transformation into a technology-reliant ecosystem built on data analytics, finding and retaining qualified analytics and informatics staff members is easier said than done.
At Georgia Tech’s Stewart School of Industrial & Systems Engineering (ISyE), a group of professors led by Nicoleta Serban, ISyE Coca-Cola Associate Professor, and Julie Swann, ISyE’s Harold R. and Mary Anne Nash Associate Professor, has brought together an interdisciplinary collaboration of healthcare analytics experts, including many members of INFORMS, the largest analytics professional society, to train the new generation of data scientists.
Swann and Serban sat down with HealthITAnalytics to discuss their efforts to provide healthcare organization with analytics professionals capable of tackling the challenges of the new data-driven care environment.
What has been the major focus of your research so far?
Nicoleta: We have a very large set of Medicaid claims for many of the children in Georgia and thirteen other states.  We have started working with local healthcare organizations as well as the policy makers in Georgia, such as the Department of Public Health and the Department of Community Health on asthma care with a focus on explaining outcomes. Beyond looking at the various factors that contribute to lack of access, we also looked at what interventions are significantly impacting the healthcare system.
READ MORE: AMIA: NIH Should Focus on Data Exchange, Access in Science
Julie: We have a population of children that are covered by public insurance, which is quite a large proportion in Georgia and a number of the other states in our analysis. The claims data has information on where a service was provided, what kind of service and what the diagnosis is. It also has an ID that allows us to follow specific patients over time or look at specific providers or look at particular kinds of geographical areas. This allows us to look separately at urban areas, like Metro Atlanta versus rural areas. Even within Metro Atlanta, we can parse out areas that have the worst kind of poverty as opposed to others that might have less of that. By looking at those claims, of which there are millions and millions, we can look at the cost in the system, or more specifically, the charges in the system.  This shows us what gets reimbursed, and we can look at what things relate to health outcomes.
Health outcomes are difficult to get in claims data because this is not an electronic health record, but we can look at things like hospitalizations or whether someone has emergencies related to asthma, for example. Then we can also look at things related to equity or variations across the system and pull in these analyses of what kinds of interventions could make the system better.
As an academic institution, one of your main responsibilities is educating future generations of data scientists.  How do you approach this training and what can students expect to learn?
Nicoleta: One of the challenges of all that claims data is the way it’s provided. The Medicaid claims data are available only as identifiable files from CMS. We have this large collection of data, but we’re stuck in a data review room where we cannot even bring notes in the room. We work with the data there without access to internet or phones. It’s a challenge. By training our students to work in that environment, I think it’s an extremely valuable skill, because much of healthcare data needs to comply with extensive privacy and confidentiality rules. It’s also coded in medical terminologies, thus students will have to learn beyond the four walls of the data. We build knowledge around that claims data, so it’s one of the skills that are extremely valuable. Of course, we also spend a great deal of time training students in statistical methods and operations research methods. We expose them to those methods also through coursework, research, and reading.
We have the data, the tools, and the methods. Then it’s putting them together and asking relevant questions. Sometimes when we think of questions, we don’t have an answer or the tool at hand that we could use. Students will have to be developing the tools themselves, and that provides a wider scope of learning beyond what other students will see in a similar situation.
READ MORE: EHR Tech Support with Clinical Focus Enhances Patient Care Quality
Julie: For these initiatives in particular, we have been working with students at all levels of the academic spectrum. This includes undergraduate students, masters students, PhD students and visiting scholars or post-docs, as well. In general, business has seen this movement towards analytics, and I think that healthcare is starting to move that way. It’s going to become even more important to understand what to do with all of this data.
What we have found is that our students need programming skills because they are working with data that is largely flat and not built into a nice user interface. They need analytical skills, like statistics or optimization, and they need to know something about the domain they’re working in, which is healthcare in this case.
How can these skills help students find their way in a changing healthcare industry?
Julie: We have been able to take someone with some basic background in industrial engineering and operations research and train them on the domain things as we need to. But it’s those fundamental, quantitative skills that you really have to have when you’re looking at these very large data sets or trying to look at things in a more complex way.
Some of our students could go on to jobs that are in healthcare organizations such as a hospital environment, or they could go onto consulting companies that are doing work in healthcare. They could even go onto entities like The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has an entire set of scientists who sit over several data sets there.
READ MORE: NIH Opens Up “All of Us” to Research Participants Nationwide
Nicoleta: We work in a very collaborative environment. We often team up two or more students on one project. They learn from each other in many skill areas beyond what is available in the research. The collaborative skills are also an added dimension to this research, and they’re really important for being successful in the healthcare industry.
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare Informatics


