TX Health IT Leader Wins 2015 HIMSS Nursing Informatics Award

January 07, 2016

By Sara Heath
January 07, 2016 - The Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS) has announced the recipient of its Nursing Informatics Leadership Award, according to a recent press release.
To recognize her influence and contributions to the informatics industry, HIMSS has selected Mary Beth Mitchell, RN, MSN, BC, CPHIMS as this year’s awardee.
Mitchell’s contributions to the informatics industry have been many. As the chief nursing informatics officer at Texas Health Resources, she is in charge of the nursing department’s use of their EHR system. Mitchell also plays an integral role in the healthcare organization’s overall EHR initiatives, specifically by overseeing their HIMSS EMRAM Stage 7 initiatives and Davies Award application.
Beyond her work at Texas Health Resources, Mitchell has contributed her knowledge to the informatics community at both a state and national level. She has given presentations on nursing informatics, the power of EHRs, the Texas Health Ebola issue, and population health improvement through informatics. She is also an informatics textbook contributor.
Dig Deeper
Data Mining, Big Data Analytics in Healthcare: What’s the Difference?
Healthcare Analytics, Information Governance Will Build a Future for HIM
Health Data Analytics a “Competitive Differentiator” for Payers
The HIMSS Nursing Informatics Leadership Award is not Mitchell’s first industry recognition for her work. In 2014 she received the honor of being named one of the Top 10 Powerhouse Women in health IT, and was a 2012 semi-finalist for the Innovator Award for Healthcare Informatics.
Considering all that Mitchell has contributed to the informatics industry, HIMSS executives say that she was a natural choice for this year’s Nursing Informatics Leadership Award.
"Mary Beth is an extraordinary leader in the field of nursing informatics," said HIMSS vice president of informatics Joyce Sensmeier, MS, RN-BC, CPHIMS, FHIMSS, FAAN. "As the chair of HIMSS nursing informatics committee, the former co-chair of the HIMSS Nursing Executive Engagement Workgroup, and a member of the Nursing Informatics Symposium Planning Committee, she is a respected thought leader in transforming healthcare and patient care through the use of technology."
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealth Information ManagementHealthcare Informatics


