Does Accountable Care Improve Hospital Quality for Minorities?

November 10, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Pay-for-performance reimbursement structures are associated with gains in quality and reduced mortality for minority patients, says a new study.
November 10, 2014 - Accountable care and value-based incentives are sweeping through the healthcare industry at a rapid pace, says a study from the American Journal of Managed Care (AJMC), and may be an effective tool for closing care quality gaps between white and minority patients suffering from chronic diseases.
Hospitals operating under a pay-for-performance model were better able to improve quality and mortality for minority patients compared to those using a traditional fee-for-service reimbursement structure, the study finds.
A team of researchers from Brigham and Women’s Hospital, the Harvard School of Public Health, and the VA Boston Healthcare System compared data from 2004 to 2008 from hospitals participating in the Premier Hospital Quality Incentive Demonstration (HQID) sponsored by CMS with those that were not part of the accountable care program.  The researchers examined treatment and mortality data on more than 1.4 million patients in 250 Premier hospitals and 3507 control organizations.  The patient cohort included those with conditions such as congestive heart failure, acute myocardial infarction (AMI), pneumonia, and coronary artery bypass graft.
They found distinct differences in the way white patients and black patients received care.  In Premier hospitals, a white AMI patient received 91% of the care for which they were eligible, while a black patient only received 88% of his or her eligible care.  However, Premier hospitals were able to decrease the AMI gap from 3% to just 0.5% over the four-year period of the study.  Premier hospitals also reduced disparities for congestive heart failure and pneumonia.  The improvements in racial parity were greater for all three conditions at Premier hospitals compared to non-Premier hospitals, although the differences were only statistically significant for heart failure and AMI.
Dig Deeper
Big Data Shows Gender-Based Medical Error, Patient Safety Patterns
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
Mortality rates were also somewhat improved in Premier hospitals.  The accountable care facilities, mortality for black patients decreased in comparison to white patients over four years for all four of the conditions included in the study, with the most statistically significant gains occurring in the treatment of pneumonia and heart failure.
The researchers call the findings “reassuring” for policy makers who are leaning heavily on accountable care and pay-for-performance reimbursement structures as a way to reduce costs and improve quality.
“Creation of a national program of pay-for-performance will further the use of P4P as part of our armamentarium for improving the quality and efficiency of our care along with other approaches such as expanded public reporting, use of accountable care organizations, patient-centered medical homes, and bundling,” the study concludes.
“Critics worry about the deleterious consequences of P4P for the care and health outcomes of minority and indigent populations. Our results from the largest demonstration done to date and from an important model for the recently established federal program suggest that the process of care for hospitalized minority patients is, if anything, improved under this formulation of pay-for-performance, and there is no evidence of a deleterious impact on mortality outcomes.”
Tagged Accountable CareHospital QualityQuality Of Care


