HHS Awards $36.3M to Providers for Population Health, EHR Use

December 10, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
HHS has splashed out on more than $36 million to recognize high quality population health management and improvements in clinical quality.
December 10, 2014 - The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has announced the distribution of $36.3 million in Affordable Care Act funding to more than 1100 healthcare providers across the nation that have achieved significant quality improvements thanks to population health management programs and advanced EHR use.  Leaders in chronic disease management, clinical outcomes, EHR reporting, and preventative care will use the awards to further the delivery of safe, cost-effective, comprehensive patient services.
“This funding rewards health centers that have a proven track record in clinical quality improvement, which translates to better patient care, and it allows them to expand and improve their systems and infrastructure to bring the highest quality primary care services to the communities they serve,” said Secretary Burwell. “With these funds, health centers in all 50 states will continue to provide access to high quality, comprehensive primary and preventive health care to the patients that need it the most.”
“These funds reward and support those health centers that have taken steps to achieve the highest levels of clinical quality performance and improvement,” added Health and Resources Administration (HRSA) Administrator Mary K. Wakefield, PhD, RN.
The awards were divided into four major categories:
Dig Deeper
CT Medical Society Announces New Health Information Exchange
How Data-Driven Care Management Improves Population Health in NC
CVS Retail Clinics, VA Partner for Care Coordination, Access
Health center quality leaders were recognized for being in the top thirty percent of providers that achieved the highest overall clinical outcomes throughout the various aspects of their organizational operations.  The funding in this category, awarded to 361 providers, totaled $11.2 million dollars.
National quality leaders received $2.5 million across 57 organizations for exceeding benchmarks for national clinical quality.  Chronic disease management, preventative care, prenatal and perinatal care, and population health management were key indicators for this award.
For showing at least a ten percent improvement in clinical quality measures between 2012 and 2013, more than 1,000 health centers received the clinical quality improver award.  Approximately $1.7 million went to 1,058 organizations in this category.
Organizations that qualified as electronic health record reporters used their EHRs to report clinical quality data on all of their patients.  HHS views this accomplishment as a key transformational step for healthcare reform.  Nearly $5 million was distributed to 332 health centers for this achievement.
Health centers were eligible for more than one category, and many received awards for multiple achievements.
HHS has been on a funding spree throughout 2014, doling out well over a billion dollars to healthcare providers to foster innovative healthcare reform and aid healthcare organizations in their quest to transform their processes to better align with federal visions of population health management, preventative care, and lower overall spending.  In May, HHS announced $840 million to develop and test data-driven care coordination models to reduce readmissions and increase patient engagement.  September saw the distribution of $295 million to help increase access to primary care services across the nation.
For a full list of health centers recognized by this latest round of funding, click here.
Tagged Care CoordinationPopulation Health Management


