What are the basic pillars of population health management?

October 01, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 01, 2013 - The buzzword pantheon has gained a new member in recent years as population health management takes on an increasingly important role in the healthcare landscape.  Healthcare organizations have started to think in terms of entire groups of patients, using clinical, financial, and sociological data to create a macro view of a neighborhood or community, which is becoming a vital tool for highlighting the risks of the individual.  But buzzwords need to be more than nice, nebulous ideas, and understanding the principles behind population health management (PHM) can guide an organization’s analytics activities as data becomes the most valuable asset a provider has when it comes to preventing problems before they appear.
A common goal
In order to bring population health management into a health system, the stars have to align.  Much like the other reform initiatives currently molding the healthcare landscape, no single department can be in charge of a project without buy-in and cooperation from the entire organization.  PHM draws on financial data, demographics, and clinical information, not to mention the expertise of professionals as diverse as health information managers, clinicians, coders, IT developers, community outreach educators, physicians, nurses, administrative staff, and the executive leadership.
Federal regulations are starting to incorporate PHM, as well, with financial penalties for poor quality or poor management of a certain chronic disease or patient segment becoming more and more common.  Health plans are taking preventative care seriously, stressing increased access to routine services as a way to slash future costs.
Without all these groups focused on using good data to drive better outcomes, the efforts of an individual branch of an organization might not be very effective.  Understanding the big picture when it comes to PHM is the first prerequisite for a successful analytics program.
READ MORE: IoT, Analytics, HIM Push Healthcare IT VC Market Past $5B
A robust infrastructure
But no PHM program can thrive without an agile, comprehensive information technology foundation.  EHRs are becoming more common than not among healthcare providers, but not every product has the capability to capture or manipulate the data necessary for population health analytics.  “Transforming a system that has evolved for decades based on episodic documentation and visit-based billing into one that can effectively offer population management and care coordination workflow is challenging, at best,” says a report by Porter Research, which found that 30% of EHRs lack sufficient PHM capabilities.
“While most healthcare providers see the critical importance of PHM, they do not have the information technology, the required understanding of PHIM, or the data management skills and resources that are required to successfully utilize population health management,” adds Bonnie Cassidy, MPA, RHIA, FAHIMA, FHIMSS.  Off-the-shelf solutions are still few and far between, and building a sufficient health IT infrastructure is time-consuming and costly.  But without the ability to collect, store, manipulate, and report on data, there is no way to make use of all the information being collected at the point of care.
A culture of change
For many providers, even the biggest health systems and academic medical centers in the country, analytics and PHM are still uncharted territory.  Providers of all sizes have their hands full with a plethora of federal regulations, reform initiatives, expensive IT projects, and a looming shortage of healthcare workers, which threaten to change the way the industry operates on a massive scale.  Making the necessary improvements and adjustments to incorporate analytics might not be top on the to-do list.  An organization needs to see the promise of analytics before it can even begin to marshal the troops.
READ MORE: Health Data Exchange Could Save Medicare $3.12 Billion a Year
“Some of the first things that must be understood when launching a PHM program is what a population of healthy people looks like, how clinical risk is defined, how financial risk is measured, and what will be the metrics used to analyze how sick patients with chronic disease do and do not get sicker,” Cassidy says.  “The goal of PHM is to keep a patient population as healthy as possible and reduce the need for expensive interventions like tests, emergency department visits, hospitalizations, and procedures.”
“The next two or three years is all about creating the foundation of data-driven healthcare,” predicts Dan Riskin, MD, CEO and co-founder of Health Fidelity.  What we want to see is whether the top health systems are able to improve outcomes and reduce costs by using best-of-breed infrastructure.  Because quite frankly, if they aren’t able to do that, no one is going to be able to.”
“So we want to watch them implement their EHRs, their data warehouses, their natural language processing and ontologies to use the full clinical data, and their analytics.  And we want to see whether they improve care.  If they don’t, then we’re in trouble.  If they do, then we have a theoretically replicable model that we will call data-driven healthcare, which we can then make into turn-key solutions for the rest of the health systems in the country and eventually, I hope, the world.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureApplied AnalyticsBig DataBig Data AnalyticsHealth Information ManagementPopulation Health Management


