In 2014, data analytics must measure outcomes, improve health

December 04, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 04, 2013 - Healthcare analytics is poised to change the way medicine works by using data to model, predict, and track patients while delivering up-to-the-second insights about everything from the financial performance of a whole hospital to how an individual patient is responding to a particular drug.  While the promise of analytics is extraordinary, the industry is still struggling to come to grips with what needs to be done, much less how to do it.
Dr. Fauzia Khan, Chief Medical Officer of Alere Analytics, spoke to HealthITAnalytics about some of the obstacles facing providers on the road to data-driven healthcare and what issues will be facing hospitals and physicians in this critical upcoming year.
What are some of the major trends in healthcare that will lead to better analytics?
We are just seeing the emergence of analytics in healthcare.  We’re seeing that people are recognizing the concept that you have to follow populations.  It’s a tremendous time in healthcare and it’s a great transformation that I don’t think we’ll ever see again in our lifetimes.  We’re moving from the fee-for-service model to a value-based model, but this is just the beginning, both from a technological standpoint and from a cultural standpoint.  There is a lot of work to be done, and hospitals are already struggling.
One trend we’re seeing is that we’re moving out of the traditional physician’s office.  You know, at one time, if you wanted to see a movie, you had to go to the theater.  If you wanted to hear a song, you had to buy a record.  Now you can just go to YouTube and see or hear anything you want to.  We’re seeing the same shift in healthcare.  We have the hospital-at-home concept and mobile devices that are in a patient’s home to monitor them.  That produces a lot of data.
READ MORE: Online Map Reveals Geographic Disparities in Care for Autism
The burden of care is moving towards the patient, too, and I think that’s a very critical piece to all this.  We know that the financial status of a person impacts their health.  Don’t we need to capture that information, too?  If they’re bankrupt or if they’re out of a job, that affects how they’re going to take care of themselves.  We have to have the ability to analyze that information and the capacity to respond to it.  None of that exists today.  We’re just barely coming to the understanding that we have to pay attention.
What will be the key to implementing meaningful analytics within a healthcare organization?
Interoperability is the most critical piece.  It’s not so much the design of the four walls of the hospital, but it’s that every piece of information that you capture in there is useful.  It needs to translate into meaningful, actionable information.  That’s what we’re struggling with at this moment.
The first step is to connect our systems.  Many hospitals have moved forward with this step.  Some of the patient data is flowing through HIEs.  The next step is making systems interoperable.  The third step is using all of the data.  We really need to get much more information about the patient if we’re really going to maintain their health.  It’s not about performing a surgery in the hospital anymore.  It’s about following patients and making sure they keep well.  We have to be caregivers.  We’re just starting on that journey.
How will meaningful use help forward the push towards quality-based reforms and analytics?
READ MORE: New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
We have people on both sides of these reforms.  Meaningful use has had an impact.  I had an opportunity to visit Europe and study how they do healthcare, and you can see that whenever there is money tied to performance, it does lead to better care.  Obviously the transition to EHR data has been helped by all this money that’s gone to meaningful use.  On the other side, some people feel that we haven’t really followed the spirit of meaningful use with just a handful of quality measures, and that it could have had a much bigger impact.
I see both sides of the story.  I see progress on one hand, and on the other hand, you see that it’s still very process-oriented.  Even if you do all the things you need to do and you take care of the process, which is how most of our quality measures are structured today, we still are not equipped to measure the outcome.  But it raised the bar, and it also gave us connectivity at some level.  It started the right discussions and the right debates, so I wouldn’t minimize meaningful use and the $20 billion that’s gone into it.
What will be the biggest projects for hospitals in 2014?
Although we are aiming very high, there will still be a lot of money and energy spent on the ICD-10 transition, which becomes a reality next year.  It will really impact the bottom line and reimbursements are going to be down.  There will be more denials if the coding is not done directly.  So hospitals are definitely struggling with that.
The fact that CMS is continuing to push penalties for quality measures, such as high rates of readmissions and hospital-acquired infections, will also be significant.  That coincides with Stage 2 Meaningful Use, so we’ll see a lot of activity on that front.
READ MORE: Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
We’ll also see hospitals looking at how they’re going to connect with different organizations.   Care coordination is becoming very key, and that’s something that we haven’t focused on too much in the past.  Also a little bit of involvement of patients.  If we want better outcomes, they have to be active and engaged in their health.
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsPatient CarePopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


