Obesity may increase care costs when coupled with chest pain

March 06, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 06, 2014 - Patients with a high body mass index (BMI) who present with chest pain may have higher care costs and spend a longer time in the hospital, says a study from the American Heart Association’s Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes journal.  High BMI increases the likelihood of indeterminate findings on diagnostic studies, which might result in additional tests and lengthier hospitalizations while physicians puzzle through symptoms.
“No study has examined the economic and operational impact of BMI in patients with chest complaints presenting to the emergency department (ED),” writes a team of researchers from a variety of hospitals and research institutions. “The objective was to measure the association of BMI with the main outcomes of cost of care, length of stay (including time in the ED and time in the wards if admitted), and radiation exposure in patients presenting to the ED with chest pain and dyspnea.”
The prospective study examined patients in four medical centers for 90 days, using follow-up phone calls and questionnaires to gather data about participants identified through electronic tracking systems at emergency departments.  None of the adult patients had previous diagnoses related to chest pain.  The research team validated its patient-provided information by looking at the EHR data of each participant.
Compared to the costs of patients with ideal weights, overweight patients cost 22% more, while the morbidly obese incurred 41% more spending and stayed in the hospital 34% longer than ideal weight patients.  The researchers combed through billing records in order to obtain information about medical costs, including imaging studies, pharmacy orders, laboratory tests, hospital materials, and physician services.
Dig Deeper
Cancer Mortality Rates See 20% Drop, but Disparities Remain
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
NIH Takes on Population Health Disparities with Social Epigenomics
While the study didn’t find that BMI was a significant predictor of radiation exposure, morbidly obese patients were seen to have “the highest proportion of no significant cardiopulmonary diagnosis for 90 days after computerized tomographic pulmonary angiography.”
With obesity affecting more than one of every three patients, costing the medical system over $150 billion a year, studying the impact of body mass on seemingly non-related conditions can give providers a better idea of how to address new or coexisting conditions.  “BMI was associated with increases in cost of care and length of hospital stay for patients with chest pain and dyspnea,” the researchers concluded.  “These results emphasize a need for specific protocols to manage morbidly obese patients presenting to the ED with chest pain and dyspnea.”
Tagged Healthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


