58% of hospitals have population health goals in sight

December 02, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 02, 2013 - Hospitals are moving ahead with population health management initiatives and preparations for value-based payments, according to a new survey of 541 hospitals by The Governance Institute.  Nearly 60% have started to build a technical infrastructure to handle population health analytics tasks, while 52% have taken steps to integrate value-based reimbursements into their business plans for the coming years.  The survey also found a greater emphasis on ensuring that executive leadership teams are well-connected to hospital data through dedicated boardroom portals and an increase in laptop and tablet use.
Hospitals are increasingly recognizing the need to use technology to track and accomplish clinical and financial goals.  Eighty-three percent of participants said that they have an effective system in place to measure whether or not strategic goals will be met, while 82% believe they are accomplished at setting appropriate short- and long-term goals for their organizations.  The vast majority of executive boards involve physicians and other clinical staff in strategic decision making and governance, while 85% of boards ranked their quality oversight practices as “excellent” or “very good”.
Hospitals are facing an increasing number of challenges as healthcare reform continues to revolutionize the way providers are paid for their services.  While only one-fifth of payers currently rely on value-based reimbursement models, health plans and hospitals alike anticipate a rapid shift towards the financial reforms involved in accountable care.  With the Medicare SGR repeal poised to sweep accountable care into the mainstream and CMS quality programs increasingly dinging hospitals for preventable readmissions and other metrics, hospitals must pay even closer scrutiny to their financial and clinical performance than ever before.
“Medicare is no longer a program that just pays the bills,” stated Dr. Patrick Conway, CMS Chief Medical Officer and Director of the Centers for Clinical Standards and Quality in a blog post last week announcing the HVBP results for fiscal year 2014. “The Affordable Care Act gave CMS many new tools to convert Medicare from a program that paid for decades on automatic pilot into one that deliberately pays to promote better health. Acute-care hospitals across the country not only are paid more for higher quality care, they also have skin in the game.”
Dig Deeper
Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
Machine Learning Can Flag Adverse Drug Events in Unstructured Data
Hospitals are recognizing the shift and doing their best to keep up, says Jona Raasch, CEO of The Governance Institute.  “As the boards continue to move their organizations forward we consider this survey to be an important indicator of how boards are spending their time, and thus what issues are important to these hospitals and health systems.  The signs of movement towards value-based payments and population health models are promising for what lies ahead.”
Tagged Accountable CareAnalytics InfrastructureFinancial AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data AnalyticsHospital QualityPopulation Health Management


