EHR data boosts link between celiac, coronary artery diseases

April 01, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 01, 2014 - Patients who suffer from celiac disease are nearly two times as likely to develop coronary artery disease as other patients, according to EHR data examined by Cleveland Clinic researchers.  The low-grade inflammation involved in the condition based in the small intestine may have significant impacts on cardiovascular health, found R.D. Gajulapalli, MD, clinical associate at the Cleveland Clinic and co-investigator of the study, in research presented at the 63rd Annual Scientific Session of the American College of Cardiology.
“People with celiac disease have some persistent low-grade inflammation in the gut that can spill immune mediators into the bloodstream, which can then accelerate the process of atherosclerosis and, in turn, coronary artery disease,” said Gajulapalli. “Our findings reinforce the idea that chronic inflammation, whether it’s from an infection or a disease, can have an adverse role in coronary artery disease and heart health in general.”
Gajulapalli and his team tabulated EHR data from 13 different healthcare systems dated between 1999 and 2013.  They found 24,530 patients diagnosed with celiac disease out of a pool of more than 22 million, and found a significantly higher proportion of cardiovascular disease among the celiac patients than a similarly structured control group, with 9.5 celiac patients also diagnosed with heart disease compared to 5.6 percent of non-celiac participants.
While the current trend towards embracing gluten-free foods for weight loss and other health reasons has highlighted the impact of celiac disease among the public, experts believe the condition is significantly underdiagnosed or often misdiagnosed as other food sensitivities.   Officially, celiac disease affects one in every 133 Americans, the study says, but the actual incidence is likely much higher.  Since a major known complication of celiac is heart disease, Gajulapalli believes that physicians need to be more careful monitoring celiac patients for cardiovascular conditions, as well.
Dig Deeper
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
ONC Highlights Its Precision Medicine Initiative Collaborations
“This is an important study because it highlights a specific patient population who might be at higher risk for coronary artery disease, even in the absence of traditional cardiovascular risk factors,” Gajulapalli said. “We were surprised by the strength of the association, especially in younger people. Patients and doctors should be aware of this association.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig DataClinical AnalyticsClinical DataClinical IntelligenceMedical ResearchPatient Data


