Andy Slavitt Nominated to Head CMS, but Faces Challenges

July 10, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 10, 2015 - Acting CMS Administrator Andy Slavitt may be moving into Medicare’s top spot permanently if the Senate confirms the White House’s Thursday nomination, major news outlets report.  Slavitt, who stepped in to fill the position vacated by Marilyn Tavenner earlier this year, may not enjoy a trouble-free confirmation process as politicians continue to tussle over the Affordable Care Act and Healthcare.gov.
"CMS plays a critical role providing quality, affordable health care to millions of Americans through Medicare, Medicaid, the Children's Health Insurance Program, and the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Mr. Slavitt has proven to be an able leader in the time he has led the agency,” said Senate Finance Committee Ranking Member Ron Wyden (D-OR) in a public statement.
The “critical role” of CMS in the rollout of the Affordable Care Act is exactly what has led some other political leaders to question Slavitt’s nomination.  Not all Congressional leaders are convinced that CMS can handle the major responsibilities of overseeing Medicare and Medicaid while shouldering the burden of the still-disputed ACA under Slavitt’s leadership.
“As the nation's largest insurer, CMS holds the key to the types of services and quality of care provided to some of our nation’s most vulnerable citizens receiving Medicare and Medicaid,” said Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-UT). “The next chief will be charged with putting these critical healthcare programs back on a strong fiscal footing, overseeing the implementation of portions of the President's health law, and managing a budget larger than the Department of Defense. This is an agency whose impact on the lives of millions of Americans and the nation’s healthcare system as a whole carries significant weight.”
Dig Deeper
CMS QIO Awards Promote Patient Safety, Healthcare Quality
ECRI: “Most If Not All” Patient Identification Errors Preventable
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
“Mr. Slavitt’s conflicted history in the medical services industry has produced mixed results and raised a number of serious concerns,” Hatch continued. “As such, he will be expected to demonstrate that he is up to the challenge and capable of successfully leading the agency through the monumental tasks that lie ahead.  Most importantly, Mr. Slavitt will need to answer a number of tough questions regarding his former employer and their relationship with the agency.”
Hatch is referring to Slavitt’s previous role as Group Executive Vice President of UnitedHealth Group’s Optum, which owned some of the subsidiaries involved in the first less-than-successful rollout of Healthcare.gov.  Optum – and Slavitt – eventually won acclaim for rescuing the beleaguered site from its initial enrollment problems, but the failures of the much-anticipated launch have soured many stakeholders on the potential of the Affordable Care Act to meet public needs.
Slavitt also stirred up controversy in 2009 as CEO of Ingenix, a database company at the center of a string of lawsuits accusing 11 major payers of shorting providers on out-of-network payments due to faulty Ingenix technology.  UnitedHealth agreed to pay $350 million to reimburse patients and providers for insufficient payments under a settlement with New York State.
Slavitt’s supporters, however, would like to see CMS focus on the future of the Affordable Care Act, not its checkered past.  After surviving the potential death knell of King vs. Burwell earlier this month, the continued implementation of the ACA will require strong leadership from CMS administration backed by a more harmonious stance in Congress.
"For a position that has such a significant impact on so many Americans, I would be disappointed to see Mr. Slavitt's nomination held hostage for the sake of political grandstanding over the ACA - the indisputable law of the land,” Wyden said. “The time has come to work together productively to ensure all Americans have the security of health care coverage, and I look forward to Mr. Slavitt's timely confirmation as a part of that effort."
Tagged Affordable Care ActQuality Of Care


