Top quality Joint Commission hospitals nearly double in 2012

November 07, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 07, 2013 - True quality and performance improvement is more than pie in the sky for a record number of hospitals recognized by the Joint Commission as Top Performers in 2012.  One-third of all Joint Commission-accredited hospitals made the highest grade, comprising 1099 facilities, 182 of which have snagged the honor for three years in a row.   Hospitals recognized as top performers have consistently met a series of accountable care quality measures for common conditions such as asthma, heart failure, stroke, pneumonia, and surgical care.
To make the list, hospitals must achieve cumulative performance of 95% or higher on a series of accountability measures, such as administering antibiotics before surgery, developing home management care plans for pediatric asthma patients, and administering aspirin to heart attack patients upon arrival.  The program is intended to serve as an improvement incentive for hospitals and drive care along the same path as many of the new pay-for-performance reimbursement models championed by government organizations and private payers alike.
And the strategy seems to be working.  Quality metrics tracked since 2008 have risen from 93.1% compliance to 97.6% overall, while those numbers collected since 2002 show an even more drastic improvement.  Pneumonia care, for example, rose from 72.4% in 2002 to 97.4% in 2012, an improvement of 25 percentage points.  Heart attack care has improved by 10.2% over the past decade, with hospitals administering evidence-based heart attack treatment in 988 out of every 1000 opportunities in 2012.
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
Big Data Analytics Link Economic Wellness to Population Health
A further twenty percent of the 3300 hospitals reporting data missed making the top grade by only one quality measure, but performed above 95% on all other criteria.  The most common shortcomings were in cardiac and surgical care, with some hospitals failing to administer PCI therapy within 90 minutes to heart attack patients or giving appropriate prophylactic antibiotics to surgical cases.  The report does not include data on whether or not the hospital caused patient harm due to failing to follow the quality guidelines.
“Results considered outstanding several years ago are now achieved by almost every Joint Commission-accredited hospital in America today. More than half of Joint Commission-accredited hospitals have reached or have nearly reached Top Performer distinction, showing that we are approaching a time in which consistent excellence in hospital performance on these important quality measures is the new normal,” says Mark R. Chassin, MD, FACP, MPP, MPH, president and CEO of The Joint Commission. “This means patients are getting better care thanks to the shared commitment by hospitals to using data and proven quality improvement methods to always do the right thing and improve quality and safety.”
  Tagged Accountable CarePatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


