NIH, 23andMe Crowdsource Precision Medicine Depression Study

August 04, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 04, 2016 - One of the most common mental health conditions in the world is getting the precision medicine treatment thanks to a unique public-private study using big data provided by 23andMe. 
The home genetics testing provider, in conjunction with research expertise supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), helped to identify fifteen new genome sites that may be linked to depression in people of European ancestry.
The study examined genetic data from more than 300,000 volunteers who had purchased genetic profiles from 23andMe’s website and agreed to participate in future research efforts using their results.
Researchers from Pfizer, 23andMe, and Massachusetts General Hospital collected patient-reported data from 75,607 individuals who said they experienced depression and a control group of 231,747 participants who did not indicate a history of depression.  
Dig Deeper
NIH Takes on Population Health Disparities with Social Epigenomics
Healthy Nevada Study Combines Genomics, Population Health
Next-Generation Genomics, Precision Medicine to Top $100B
They also integrated this data with from a previous Psychiatric Genome Consortium study, which contained information on 20,000 patients with clinically confirmed diagnoses of depression.
The results of the genome-wide association study (GWAS) were published this month in Nature Genetics.
“A total of 17 independent single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from 15 regions reached genome-wide significance after joint analysis over all three data sets,” the study explained. “Some of these loci were also implicated in genome-wide association studies of related psychiatric traits.”
The project is significant in several ways.  Firstly, it adds significant evidence to the hereditability of depression by identifying the chromosomal sites that may influence the development of the condition in patients of specific ancestries. 
The NIH points out that previous GWAS efforts have failed to produce similar results, which may be due to the fact that few researchers have had access to such large-scale genomic data.
“Since depression is thought to be like fever — a common set of symptoms likely rooted in multiple causes — lumping together genetic data from people with different underlying illness processes likely washed out, or statistically diluted, subtle evidence of effects caused by risk genes,” an NIH press release said.
It also opens up new possibilities for using commercially-obtained data from organizations like 23andMe to fuel academic projects that may have a direct impact on clinical care.
Depression affects close to eight percent of adolescents and adults in any two-week period, according to the CDC, and almost half of those cases are considered severe.  Patients with severe depression report serious difficulties in the workplace, in social situations, and at home.  Low-income patients are approximately two-and-a-half times more likely to suffer from depression than their wealthier counterparts.
More than 8 million ambulatory care visits each year are primarily related to major depressive disorder.  Over 41,000 people commit suicide each year due to the condition, and millions more experience the exacerbation of other chronic conditions, such as diabetes and heart disease, due to their underlying depression.
Large-scale volunteer studies may bring hope to these patients, and to the untold number of Americans who are living with depression without a diagnosis.  The results of this type of work may also inform population health management strategies aimed at improving patient education, self-care abilities, engagement, and treatment adherence.
“These studies provide evidence for large-scale consumer genomic data as a powerful and efficient complement to data collected from traditional means of ascertainment for neuropsychiatric disease genomics,” the Nature Genomics study added.
The study also found that there may be an overlap between the genetic roots of depression and the origins of other mental health conditions, which may eventually give investigators some insight into how to identify, treat, and manage patients with multiple behavioral and mental health issues.
Similar studies will also hopefully reduce the stigma around depression and other mental illnesses, added MGH researcher Roy Perlis, MD, MSC.
“We hope these findings help people understand that depression is a brain disease, with its own biology,” he said.  “Now comes the hard work of using these new insights to try to develop better treatments.”
Tagged GenomicsMedical ResearchPersonalized MedicinePrecision Medicine


