Foundation Funds $5.7M Population Health Management Playbook

February 05, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 05, 2015 - The de Beaumont Foundation has committed $5.76 million to continue the development of population health management by working with industry leaders to expand the reach and mission of The Practical Playbook initiative. The Playbook provides healthcare organizations with a step-by-step roadmap for building competencies and relationships that foster data-driven population health management within the community, and will add new leadership and projects as it enters the second phase of its work.
The Playbook, compiled by organizations including Duke Community and Family Medicine and the CDC, starts with a basic guide to assessing a provider’s readiness and resources to begin population health services. The document encourages healthcare organizations to allocate resources and staff members appropriately, use available materials effectively, and ensure thorough data collection and information exchange in order to facilitate individualized care, new community programs, and patient engagement.
“The support and recognition that the Practical Playbook has received in Phase I from organizations like the Institute of Medicine (IOM) and the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) is a testament to the great need for this resource in both public health and medical fields,” said James Sprague, MD, chairman of the board of the de Beaumont Foundation and a member of the steering committee. “The Practical Playbook has already made a significant impact in its first year of operations, and Phase II will accelerate that forward momentum.”
The second phase of the initiative will include help from HHS in the form of Rear Admiral Sarah Linde, MD, Chief Public Health Officer at the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA). Dr. Linde will join the steering committee as it works to forge stronger bonds between primary care providers and public health organizations.
Dig Deeper
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
ACOs Lack Resources, Skills for Population Health Management
Three Finalists Named for $100,000 Population Health Prize
The Practical Playbook will also take a key role in the BUILD Health Challenge, a grant program supported by the de Beaumont Foundation, the Advisory Board Company, the Kresge Foundation, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and the Colorado Health Foundation.
Up to $8.5 million in BUILD awards will be distributed to seventeen communities that have demonstrated strong partnerships with measurable effects on public and social health issues that impact the cost, quality, or outcomes of patient care. The Playbook will provide technical help to winners of the grants. Data analytics and reporting capabilities feature largely in the competition, which encourages the flow of information between disparate organizations that previously failed to communicate effectively.
“The communities funded by the BUILD Health Challenge will provide us with an unprecedented opportunity to learn and develop best practices for multi-partner collaboration to improve population health,” said Lloyd Michener, MD, Professor and Chair of Duke Community and Family Medicine. “We look forward to working closely with the grantees and being able to identify common challenges and adaptable solutions as these partnerships grow in their work.”
Tagged Care CoordinationPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


