DOD, VA have no idea if $9.3 billion spent on PTSD worked

June 23, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 23, 2014 - In yet another unfortunate “what not to do with healthcare” example from the government, officials at the Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs have no real idea if the $9.3 billion they spent on mental healthcare between 2010 and 2012 for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) among the military patient population had any real effect.  In a report to Congress, the Institutes of Medicine (IOM) points out that neither branch of the military healthcare system has an adequate analytics infrastructure to collect data and measure the impact of the mental health project, and the two departments lack long-term population health management techniques to ensure regular access to care and comprehensive follow-up for mental health patients.
IOM estimates that PTSD affects between 7% and 20% of veterans who have served in the recent conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, making the behavioral disorder one of the most prevalent chronic conditions among the veteran patient population.  In 2012, more than half a million veterans made at least two visits to a VA facility for PTSD treatment, representing 9% of all VA care encounters.  While the DOD and VA have launched a wide array of programs to diagnose, treat, and support veterans with PTSD throughout the lengthy conflicts, the IOM found a significant lack of hard data evaluating the effectiveness of their programs when asked to survey the system as part of the 2010 National Defense Authorization Act.
The DOD screens deployed service members at 30 days and again between three and six months after returning from a deployment.  The DOD has several PTSD care paths, including mental healthcare providers in primary care clinics, specialized intensive treatment centers, and inpatient mental health care.  However, IOM found that “PTSD management in DOD appears to be local, ad hoc, incremental, and crisis-driven with little planning devoted to the development of a long-range, population-based approach for the disorder.”
Neither the VA nor the DOD could provide sufficient data for IOM to adequately determine “whether PTSD management is improving or that a population-based approach is being used to reach and treat service members and veterans in need of care,” the report says.  “Furthermore, current DOD and VA strategic efforts do not necessarily encourage the use of best practices for preventing, screening for, diagnosing, and treating for PTSD and its comorbidities, and they do not extend to ensuring continuity of care as service members transition from active duty to veteran status.”
Dig Deeper
Population Health is Top Data Analytics Challenge for Providers, Payers
IBM Watson, Siemens Partner for Population Health Management
Optum Risk Management Analytics Cut Opioid Use by 14%
Accountability among leadership at military medical centers is lacking, IOM adds, and a lack of communication among stakeholders results in redundant, inefficient, and expensive care.  The dearth of outcome data is also concerning, and the report strongly recommends that the departments engage in the use of standard metrics, improve health information technology infrastructure to encourage the collection of sufficient clinical outcome data, and pay close attention to clinical training, leadership accountability, and care coordination techniques.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureChronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


