EHR, analytics fragmentation presents challenges for hospital

November 12, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 12, 2013 - “Interoperability” is a word familiar to every health IT professional.  But too often, it’s still preceded by “the lack of.”  In hospitals and health systems nationwide, specialists like Audrey Funt, RN, MSN, Clinical Informaticist at the Burholme Campus of the Temple University Health System, are working to turn a myriad of products, from inpatient EHRs to emergency department management software to add-on analytics packages, into a streamlined system that allows data to flow where it’s needed.
Funt sat down with HealthITAnalytics for the next installment of our Informaticist Series to discuss how she keeps an eye on the many systems under her care, and how analytics plays into the larger goals of healthcare reform, including Stage 2 of meaningful use.
How did you get interested in informatics and health IT?
I’ve been a nurse for twenty-five years, specializing in critical care and cardiology.  I wanted to set my sights on a different direction, and went back for my master’s degree.  I took some courses in IT and project management, and then I did an internship in informatics, and decided that I really liked that and it was a good fit for me.  I was working here in the catheterization lab and we were getting ready to implement a new EHR for the ED, and they knew I had interest in that area.  So I went onto that build and did it from the ground up.
From there, we decided to do an EHR throughout the hospital, so that seemed like a natural path to follow.  Then we did the CPOE build, and they decided what they had really wanted for a long time was a clinical informaticist that would have the pulse of all of the applications, because there are so many.  It just seemed like a natural progression.
READ MORE: EHR Data, Machine Learning Create Cost-Based Clinical Pathways
What are some of the challenges you face when it comes to integrating your health IT systems?
It would be nice if we had one big system, because it would make our lives much easier.  But that’s not the case, because really there are so many different applications out there.  There’s a separate one for the lab system, and our radiology system.  And to have everything talk to one another is one of the challenges we face – one that everyone faces, I would imagine.  Our emergency department system is yet another external system that doesn’t talk as nicely as we would like it to with our house EHR.  That’s definitely been an issue and a challenge.  We interface with as much as we possibly can, and obtain as much information from those other sources as we can.  Some of that is easier than others.
For example, our radiology and lab systems will connect to the ED system.  But our ED documentation will not go into our house EHR.  So basically, it’s just printing out the patient’s chart and sending it up with any other paper records they might have.  We didn’t buy the cardiology interface for the ED, so our EKGs remain on paper.  So there’s still a lot of paper.
It can be very fragmented, but we’re always looking to improve on that.  We’re looking at a new lab system.  In the future, we’re looking towards what will be easier and what will be more self-contained, so you’re not in so many different applications to get the information that you need.  It’s frustrating for our clinicians, as well, because they have to go to different systems to get the data.
One of the things that we were able to do is create a portal that’s a single log-on.  From that portal, you can set up your other logins, so you can have access to the EHR system through the portal, or you can look at the radiology system if there’s something you want to look at further.  That ties in some of it.  It’s sort of like a foyer, really.
READ MORE: Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
Why didn’t you invest in a single organization-wide system?
There are several reasons.  The first is that we were on a Siemens system that they were not going to support anymore, and we had only a couple of years to implement something new.  Another obstacle comes from the fact that we’re under the Temple Health System umbrella, so our emergency department system is the same system in all of Temple’s hospitals.
So Temple really rules the roost in a lot of our decisions, and they mark out paths that we need to follow.  Since the ED is staffed by Temple Health physicians, they didn’t want the physicians to be on different systems if they move to different hospitals within the system.  And yes, budget definitely plays into all of that.
How do you make use of analytics on an everyday basis?
We’re always looking at best practices and evidence-based medicine. We’re looking at the core quality measures, which is also a piece of best practices, and we’ve incorporated different points of care that can capture information and point out clinicians towards choosing best practice options.
READ MORE: EHR Analytics Track C. Diff Patients to Flag Infection Trends
For example, if a physician doesn’t order heparin for a certain case where heparin is indicated, he’ll have to say why he didn’t order it.  They are always pointed in the direction of best practices.  There’s an awful lot of that incorporated in the Stage 2 meaningful use criteria, too.
How prepared are you for Stage 2 of meaningful use?
We’re constantly evaluating our readiness for Stage 2.  I think we’re in a very good place.  We’ve attested to Stage 1, so we have all that in place.  That definitely helps put us in a better position for Stage 2.  We’ve actively been trying to figure out exactly what’s needed, just like everyone else.  Things keep changing all the time.  You really need to decipher exactly what’s required, and you can’t get it wrong.  You just can’t.  We also have an external auditing company that comes in to tell us where they think we are.  A lot of hospitals don’t have that, to the best of my knowledge.  I don’t know why they wouldn’t.
There are still plenty of things we need to implement, and the projects we need to do are big, and they’ll all take the same resources.   Plus we have upgrades happening to our hardware and databases in order for Siemens to be able to certify its EHR products for Stage 2.  We have maybe eight months to put all of this into place in order to attest.  Like most other systems, we’re constantly challenged by the same issues: money, time, resources.  But fortunately, we’ve been able to work with that and become very successful.  I can only hope that doesn’t change.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare InformaticsInformaticist SeriesMeaningful UseNurse Informaticists


