Single question flags patients at six-fold risk for suicide

December 09, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 09, 2013 - With suicide currently the tenth leading cause of death in the United States, killing more Americans every year than car accidents, self-harm is an issue that affects population health on a massive scale.  While primary care providers often view such mental health problems as out of their purview, referring patients to a psychologist for further treatment, new research from the Group Health Research Institute has shown that one single question from a simple depression survey can accurately identify patients six times more likely than their peers to attempt self-harm or suicide.
By analyzing the EHR data of more than 84,000 patients with depressive symptoms, Gregory E. Simon, MD, MPH, and his team found that responses to one item on the standard Patient Health Questionnaire for depression (PHQ-9) flagged patients who were significantly more likely to attempt suicide than those who had no suicidal ideation.   The question asks how often over the last two weeks the patient has felt that he would be better off dead.  Patients who answered “more than half the days” or “nearly every day” were six times more likely to harm themselves than patients who responded “not at all.”  Of the patients involved in the study, 709 attempted suicide and 46 patients died by their own hand.
Previous to the study, there were no reliable indicators to identify this population, Simon notes, and screenings for suicide risk are not recommended by the US Preventative Services Task Force.  However, due to the strong correlation between answers to the PHQ-9 question and actual follow through of self-harm, the research team recommends increased use of the patient survey in order to more effectively treat depression and prevent harm.  There was a “linear relationship between [the question] score and risk of subsequent suicide attempt, with a 91% increase in risk…for each one-step increase in reported frequency of thoughts of death or self-harm,” the study states.
While few patients acted on their feelings immediately after completing the questionnaire, the risk of a suicide attempt increased over the following days and months, indicating that “suicidal ideation should be viewed as an enduring vulnerability rather than simply a short-term crisis,” the study says. “These findings emphasize the need for sustained and organized follow-up care to address ongoing risk. Early intervention to reduce this morbidity and mortality would require both accurate screening tests and effective interventions for persons found to be at risk.”
Tagged Healthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


