Telehealth is important link for safety net population health

May 15, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 15, 2014 - While much has been made of the ability to use tablets and smartphones to reach into the daily lives of patients and connect them to preventative or ongoing care, the truth is that some of the most vulnerable and high-risk patients are among the 44% of Americans who don’t yet have access to these technologies.  These patients are often served by community health clinics, urgent care centers, or emergency departments – when they have access to care at all.  They require innovative thinking from their providers if they are to receive adequate care that reduces the overwhelming strain on the national safety net, said Veenu Aulakh, Executive Director of the Center for Care Innovations in San Francisco, California.
“It’s great if we can create apps for people who have plenty of resources, but what about those without smartphones?” Aulakh said at the 2014 HIMSS National Healthcare Innovation Summit in Boston this week. “We don’t want these people to be left behind.”
The answer is to use competencies that organizations already possess, she said, while cooperating with partners that can help new ideas blossom at scale.  Aulakh cited the example of the round-the-clock interpretation services that are now available to patients of 45 hospitals across California.  More than 40% of the state’s residents speaking a language other than English as their primary tongue, and these patients often express less satisfaction with their care as well as more confusion about their health statuses.  The need for translators to help these patients understand their care was too great for any one provider to handle.  By pooling their resources and employing inexpensive, widely-available VoIP technology, the organizations are now able to provide interpretation coverage whenever necessary.
Aulakh also spoke of an additional program, born out of CCI’s Catalyst innovation incubator, which has brought telehealth to homebound patients who otherwise could not check in with their providers.  Equipped with webcams and iPads, medical assistants are sent into the patient’s home and help patients conduct videoconferences with clinicians.  The visit is billable under California’s telehealth laws, which helps to encourage providers to make use of the program.
Dig Deeper
Payers, Providers Make Dental Care a Population Health Issue
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Value Proposition Hard to Find for Care Coordination Tools
The same technology can also help providers consult with colleagues in real time during an office visit.  Physicians can conference in a pharmacist, mental health worker, or other professional to answer questions and coordinate care while the patient is still in the room and listening.
By encouraging providers to think innovatively about their own methods of delivering care, Aulakh and CCI are trying to leverage the smarts of staff members who intimately understand the complex problems of safety net patients. “How can we help support the safety net to develop it from the inside to reach these populations?” she asked during her presentation.  “How can we change the culture to not be afraid to take risks even if operating on very thin margins?”
CCI hopes to use its series of grants and innovation programs to help providers answer those questions, she added, as the industry as a whole turns its face towards patient engagement, population health, and a sharper focus on helping high-risk patients avoid the pitfalls of chronic diseases and missed opportunities to care for themselves.

Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationPatient EngagementPopulation Health ManagementSafety Net PatientsTelehealthTelemedicine


