LTPAC Orgs Need Better Health Data Exchange Standards, APIs

November 01, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 01, 2017 - More robust health data exchange standards and the adoption of application programming interfaces (APIs) will help to improve interoperability among long-term and post-acute care (LTPAC) facilities, the ONC says, but helping these organizations overcome deeply entrenched barriers to health IT development remains a challenge.
During a listening session conducted as part of National Health IT Week in early October, ONC leaders stressed the importance of developing additional health IT infrastructure in the post-acute care environment to support safe and seamless transitions of care.
“LTPAC providers and developers play a critical role in providing care for patients who experience frequent transitions across multiple settings and have a range of complex, chronic conditions,” stated Genevieve Morris, the ONC’s Principal Deputy National Coordinator for Health Information Technology , and Liz Palena Hall, Policy Analyst and Nurse Advisor.
“These transitions between care settings create the need for communication and coordination between each service point. As ONC works to implement national interoperability objectives, it is important to engage and learn from a diverse set of stakeholders, including the LTPAC industry, as well as patients and caregivers.”
The lessons garnered from the listening session focused on the urgent need for LTPAC organizations to engage fully in the interoperability ecosystem that is slowly growing among acute care providers and physicians.
READ MORE: Are Health Data Interoperability Standards the Same in Theory as Practice?
LTPAC facilities often handle some of the sickest and most complex patients, including frail and elderly patients at risk of frequent readmissions to and discharges from the hospital setting.  When providers in any care setting prepare to treat these patients, they must have current and accurate data on hand, said Palena Hall and Morris.
“When patients are transitioned from one clinical setting to another, both the content and the timing of the exchange are critical,” they explained. “In a paper-based environment, patient records frequently arrive on the gurney with the patient. Too often, in an electronic environment, the electronic record or summary of care arrives days after the patient has arrived.”
“Listening session participants noted that a patient’s health information needs to arrive either before admission or concurrent with the patient’s arrival. Post-acute staff often spend considerable time and resources chasing information during transitions to continue the safe, effective delivery of care.”
Some of these issues are due to inadequate or cumbersome organizational policies and processes, the ONC pointed out.  LTPAC organizations could make low-cost improvements to transitions of care by reviewing their workflows and developing team-based strategies that prioritize communication and collaboration.  
But a lack of interoperable technology could limit the effectiveness of these steps.  While LTPAC organizations certainly recognize the need for better technical and process strategies around transitions of care, finding the resources and talent to implement interoperable infrastructure is an ongoing challenge for many.
READ MORE: Interoperability, Data Exchange Help Transform Post-Acute Care
“Infrastructure for interoperability is not free—something that is understood and well accepted in other sectors such as banking with their network of ATMs, but has not yet translated into healthcare,” the ONC officials noted. “LTPAC facilities are often faced with the high cost of health IT infrastructure investments.”
With few federal incentives available to them, LTPAC providers have struggled to procure health IT tools that meet the unique needs of their care environments while also allowing standards-based data exchange. 
As of 2016, only 64 percent of skilled nursing facilities (SNFs) used electronic health records – far below the adoption rates among physicians and hospitals.
Health IT developers participating in the session acknowledged that they have struggled to create products that are standardized enough to allow for meaningful information exchange and effective transitions of care.
“There is variability in how standards related to the common clinical data set (e.g., medications, problems, labs) are implemented and many of them have developed “work arounds” such as rules within their software to address the different ways they receive standard-based information from other systems,” Morris and Palena Hall explained. “They said that less variability in implementation of standards could support improved interoperability.”
READ MORE: Health Data Interoperability Requires Patience, Persistence
APIs could offer an attractive alternative to ground-up development of standards and exchange protocols, health IT vendors added.  These shared connections to promote the flow of data across disparate systems could create an environment in which accurate, trusted, and secure health data exchange is routine.
Many of the developers and technology organizations participating in the event said they are committed to integrating APIs into their future data exchange approaches to ensure that providers have access to the information they need to provide optimal care.
As a sign of their commitment to the LTPAC provider community, almost a dozen development organizations signed the ONC Interoperability Pledge, which highlights three key aspects of ensuring meaningful health information exchange:
Consumer access: To help consumers easily and securely access their electronic health information, direct it to any desired location, learn how their information can be shared and used, and be assured that this information will be effectively and safely used to benefit their health and that of their community.
No information blocking/transparency: To help providers share individuals’ health information for care with other providers and their patients whenever permitted by law, and not block electronic health information (defined as knowingly and unreasonably interfering with information sharing).
Standards: Implement federally recognized, national interoperability standards, policies, guidance, and practices for electronic health information, and adopt best practices including those related to privacy and security.
Among the organizations who took the pledge is the National Association for the Support of Long Term Care (NASL), which reiterated the importance of integrating LTPAC organizations more thoroughly into the data-driven care continuum.
“NASL strongly believes that there are tremendous opportunities for improving patient care and achieving savings for Medicare, Medicaid and our nation’s healthcare system – opportunities that may be missed without greater involvement from the LTPAC sector,” the organization said.
“LTPAC providers are key partners of hospitals and physicians, as well as the federal government, in improving rehospitalization rates and patients’ quality of care when transitioning from one care setting to another.”
Morris and Palena Hall applauded NASL and its colleagues for taking action to symbolize their continued emphasis on developing and deploying effective data standards to support patients in the post-acute care environement.
“This is a significant step forward on the healthcare system’s journey of making electronic health information readily available in a timely manner to improve the health and care of patients,” they wrote.
“ONC commends these LTPAC organizations and health IT developers for their commitment to achieving nationwide interoperability and looks forward to continued collaboration to ensure that when individuals are at their most vulnerable, their healthcare information is widely available to provide them with better care and create better outcomes.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementHealth Data ExchangeHealth IT StandardsHealthcare InteroperabilityPopulation Health ManagementTransitions of Care


