Accountable care extends Medicare hospital funds to 2030

July 29, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 29, 2014 - Thanks to accountable care initiatives, better care coordination, and a reduction in 30-day readmissions, Medicare’s Part A hospital trust fund will be financially solvent until 2030, four years longer than previously anticipated, says a new report by CMS.  Efforts to cut spending, spurred on by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), seem to be having a noticeable effect on overall costs, reducing annual per capital spending to 0.8% annually over the last four years, a much slower rate of growth than the average 3.1% annual increase in per capita GDP and national health spending during the same time.
“The Medicare Hospital Insurance trust fund is projected to be solvent for longer, which is good news for beneficiaries and taxpayers,” CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner said in a press release. “Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, we are taking important steps to improve the quality of care for Medicare beneficiaries, while improving Medicare’s long-term solvency.”
“Specifically, we have made major progress in improving patient safety, decreasing hospital readmissions, and establishing new payment models such as accountable care organizations aimed at reducing costs and improving quality.  These reforms slow the rise in health care spending while improving the quality of care for beneficiaries.”
The report notes that projections of Medicare costs are highly uncertain due to the rapid development of new drugs, procedures, and technologies that can quickly change the length and expense of disease treatments, and also points out that the recent economic downturn coupled with the sharp shock of changes implemented by the ACA, may not indicate a long-term trend towards continual reductions in spending.
Dig Deeper
CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
However, the report adds, “the Trustees are hopeful that US health care practices are in the process of becoming more efficient as providers anticipate a future in which the rapid cost growth rates of previous decades, in both the public and private sectors, do not return.”
CMS believes that accountable care organizations and pay-for-performance reimbursement models have been instrumental in driving down costs and achieving higher quality care.  Population health management techniques, a greater reliance on health IT to produce safer and more comprehensive care, and improvements in the way care is coordinated between provider partners due to health information exchange have been key to the successes that will extend the life of Medicare for the moment.
Without an industry-wide investment in novel payment structures and outcomes-based reimbursements, the future of Medicare looks grim, the report warns. “If the health sector cannot transition to more efficient models of care delivery and achieve productivity increases commensurate with economy-wide productivity, and if the provider reimbursement rates paid by commercial insurers continue to follow the same negotiated process used to date, then the availability and quality of health care received by Medicare beneficiaries would, under current law, fall over time relative to that received by those with private health insurance.”
Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationPay for Performance


