CDC: 78% of hospitals may be overusing antibiotic treatments

September 11, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 11, 2014 - The majority of hospitals may be putting patient safety at risk by overusing antibiotics, warns the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in a new study after finding evidence that 78% of hospitals could be ordering redundant therapies that contribute to antibiotic resistance and the rise of deadly, intractable superbugs.  Combination therapies that include two or more drugs intended to address the same microbes may not always be warranted, the study says, and simply contribute to higher healthcare costs instead of significantly reducing the likelihood of patient infections.
“Overuse and inappropriate use of antimicrobials is a major public health issue and contributes to patient harm, antimicrobial resistance, and unnecessary healthcare costs,” the study says. “It has been recognized for several decades that of patients receiving antimicrobial therapy, up to half receive unnecessary or inappropriate therapy, including redundant therapy. Focusing on redundant or duplicate antimicrobial therapy is 1 recommended strategy to reduce overutilization and its attendant effects on patient safety and hospital costs.”
While an earlier report from the CDC acknowledges that hospital acquired infections (HAIs) have dropped dramatically over the past six years, the improvements are likely due to a more intense focus on quality, hand hygiene, and surgical precision rather than the increase in comprehensive antibiotic coverage.  “Examination of treatment pathways shows that some clinicians will administer antibiotics with overlapping spectra as empiric therapy to reduce the chances that the infecting organism will be resistant to the regimen. However, aside from this use, there are very few clinical indications for using antibiotics with overlapping spectra,” the new study points out.
Overprescribing of antimicrobial treatments may also increase the chance of medical errors.  A lack of care coordination, inattention to previous prescriptions, or incomplete pharmacy records may contribute to inappropriate use of multiple medications that pile on unnecessary costs during a patient’s hospital stay.
Dig Deeper
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Decision Support, Big Data Analytics Reduce Hospital Blood Use
HHS: Patient Safety Efforts Save 125K Lives, $28B in Spending
“For example, if the median cost for vancomycin (1 g every 12 hours) was $10.38 per dose day and the median cost for linezolid (600 mg every 12 hours) was $163.24 per dose day, then the excess cost for this combination was $163.24 per patient for each day of combination antimicrobial therapy when linezolid was considered redundant and $10.38 when vancomycin was considered redundant,” the study explains.
The financial impact overprescribing behaviors exceeds $12 million per year in potentially avoidable costs.  The combination of metronidazole and piperacillin-tazobactam accounted for more than 70% of potential redundant usage, and is considered a prime target for improvement, the report says.  “We believe all facilities should consider, where possible, implementing these simple antibiotic stewardship practices, which will not only save money but also likely improve patient outcomes at the same time.”
Tagged Healthcare QualityHospital QualityPatient CarePatient Safety


