$2.7M in grants goes to population health management projects

October 24, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 24, 2013 - Research into population health management is getting a huge boost from the National Network of Public Health Institutes, which has just announced 11 new research awards totaling $2.7 million.  The grants will fund a variety of community-based research projects at academic and public institutions across the country with guidance from the National Coordinating Center for Public Health Services and Systems Research (NCC), part of the University of Kentucky College of Public Health.
The projects cover a range of public health issues, including pediatric asthma, outbreaks of food-borne illnesses, primary healthcare integration, and teen immunizations.  Many of the studies will use health IT and data analytics to identify gaps in the efficiency, quality, and utilization of resources among publically-funded healthcare organizations.
Brian Dixon, an assistant professor of health informatics at the Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis School of Informatics and Computing, plans to use his portion of the funding to explore the feasibility of using EHRs to measure the health outcomes of local residents on a neighborhood basis, drilling down all the way to a block-by-block picture for public health planning.  By examining socio-economic factors along with the type and frequency of health services received, Dixon hopes to create the most detailed map of population health possible with the information at hand.
“When there is a limited budget for, say, preventing diabetes, the county health department has to determine how to spend its resources,” Dixon said. “One choice is to evenly divide the money across all communities within the county, some of which probably don’t have as much need as others. A second choice is to identify specific areas within the county that might need intervention the most.  We’re not sure how small you can go until you have no confidence in what the data are telling you.”
Dig Deeper
Cancer Mortality Rates See 20% Drop, but Disparities Remain
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Three Finalists Named for $100,000 Population Health Prize
Laura D. Cassidy at the Medical College of Wisconsin will study how the leadership styles of local health department directors can impact resource utilization, while Elizabeth Gyllstrom and Kevin Peterson from the Minnesota Department of Health will examine how the degree of integration cross the primary care and public health systems can affect patient outcomes.  At Temple University, Jennifer Ibrahim will create and evaluate an online database of Nebraska’s public health laws to better understand how legislation affects public health delivery.
“In this era of health reform, it is imperative that we not forget that public health holds a key to improving the population’s health, a major tenant of Affordable Care Act,” said Douglas  Scutchfield, MD, co-principal investigator of the NCC. “These grants will help us use research to further the efforts to develop public health’s capacity to perform in this changing health care environment.”
The grants are supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the nation’s largest philanthropic organization devoted exclusively to healthcare.  The Foundation and its partners hope to add to the body of knowledge necessary to improve the quality and efficiency of public healthcare.
Tagged Healthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


