EHR Data Integrity, Care Coordination Top Patient Safety Risks

April 09, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 09, 2015 - Poor EHR data integrity, overwhelming alerts, and a number of potential hazards related to inadequate care coordination topped the ECRI Institute’s latest list of critical patient safety concerns.
The annual list, which is often flooded with health IT usability issues, puts alarm fatigue in first place for 2015, and includes six entries involving data integrity mistakes or care coordination issues that place patients at risk for unintended complications and adverse events.
The Top 10 Patient Safety Concerns lists draw on event report data collected since 2009 that identify healthcare quality issues that have measurable impacts on patient outcomes.  Half of the entries on the 2015 list are appearing for the first time, which highlights the ongoing need for vigilance to prevent potentially helpful health IT systems from causing more problems than they solve.
Alarm fatigue is a well-known unintended consequence of EHR adoption, and one that has been increasingly plaguing providers as more clinical systems congregate around the patient’s bedside. Hospitals and healthcare organizations have been working to better integrate medical devices, streamline alerts, and use clinical analytics to simplify communications, yet the pop-ups, alarms, and alerts continue to cause frustration, force providers into unapproved workarounds, and distract nursing staff from delivering high quality, focused care.
These fragmented workflows may also contribute to some of the other items on the ECRI watch list, such as medication delivery errors due to confusing metric and imperial measures, failure to adequately conduct independent double-checks, improper administration of IV therapies when lines get mixed up, and inadequate cleaning and reprocessing of medical equipment.
READ MORE: QIO Program Boosts Medicare Care Coordination, Patient Safety
EHR data integrity, or a lack thereof, took the number two spot on the list, following its similarly high ranking in 2014.  Gaps and errors in EHR data may also be implicated in the fifth patient safety hazard: adverse care coordination events due to inadequate medication reconciliation.
“With the introduction of any new technology, we need to identify and respond to novel problems it presents as well as old problems that the new technology doesn’t eliminate,” says William M. Marella, MBA, Executive Director of Operations and Analytics at ECRI.
While poor data integrity has always been an issue, even during the era of paper charts, the problem has taken on increased significance as a single typographic error can now spread to several different places or multiple organizations. “As EHRs become more interoperable, incorrect information is more readily available, more easily shared, and harder to eliminate,” Marella explained. “In order to get a return on the investment we’ve made in EHRs and clinical decision support, we now need to tackle the more mundane problem of making sure the data in the EHR is accurate.”
Health information managers and clinical documentation improvement specialists should watch for common EHR data integrity errors such as cross-over information from one patient chart to another, the inaccurate use of default values or pre-populated data fields, delayed delivery of data critical for treatment decision-making, inconsistencies between paper and electronic records, and the inappropriate use of documentation cloning, or copying and pasting old information that may be outdated into a current patient note.
Raising the level of EHR data integrity can improve coordination, reduce the chance for miscommunication, and ensure smooth and safe transitions of care, which takes the ninth spot on the list. “Transporting a patient within the hospital to another clinical setting or between units within the facility presents risk of harm to the patient and, depending on the needs of the patient, can be an unsettling experience for nurses charged with caring for the patient, and for the transporter,” says Kelly Graham, BS, RN, patient safety analyst at ECRI Institute PSO.
READ MORE: Vendors Push Big Data Analytics, but Hospitals Focus on Safety, Security
While formal patient handoff protocols developed by the Joint Commission, Society of Critical Care Medicine, and the American College of Critical Care Medicine provide a framework for the clinical care of a patient during a setting change, transitions of care are vulnerable to delays and errors due to missing patient information and muddled communication between providers and family members. Healthcare organizations that pay close attention to transitions of care, such as those who provide complete and timely discharge summaries, are likely to experience fewer medical errors and 30-day hospital readmissions than those who do not leverage EHR data integrity and advanced transition care planning for patient safety.
Improving care coordination and EHR data integrity across the spectrum of healthcare business partners is critical for participation in many value-based reimbursement programs, and is also an important metric for Stage 2 meaningful use participation.  Patient safety is a concern for all providers, no matter what their focus, Marella adds.  “While some of these hazards are most applicable to acute care, several are also relevant in ambulatory settings, and some—especially those related to medications and care coordination—span the continuum of care.”
Tagged Care CoordinationHealth Information ManagementPatient Safety


