Population health management will expand for 9% of diabetics

September 02, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 02, 2014 - An increasing number of Type 2 diabetes patients will be enrolled in population health management programs designed and run by primary care providers, endocrinologists, and managed care organizations, according to a new report from Decision Resources Group (DRG), in an effort to curtail the financial and physical toll of the disease on the healthcare system and patients alike.  Over the next two years, the amount of diabetic patients participating in a population health program may rise from 72 percent to 81 percent and will increasingly include patients who were not previously categorized as very high risk.
Nearly one in ten Americans is currently suffering from the disease, according to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), including more than a quarter of patients over the age of 65.  Close to 28% of diabetes patients aren’t even aware that they have the condition, a recent report said, and a further 86 million adults are classified as pre-diabetic.  With the economic impact of diabetes hitting nearly $250 billion per year, disproportionally affecting the poorest patients in the nation, population health management programs have become a matter of critical importance for providers who are increasingly accepting financial risk and signing reimbursement contracts based on outcomes.
“Population health management (PHM) programs build off earlier efforts around patient-centered medical homes and will become increasingly pronounced as payers develop more risk-sharing arrangements with providers that will strongly link to the principles of PHM,” said Roy Moore, Principal Director at DRG.”PHM places greater emphasis on metrics tied to HbA1c levels and reducing hospitalizations. Therapies that can achieve these goals should perform well and received increased uptake from physicians whose compensation is tied to these metrics.”
Close to 80% of providers surveyed by Decision Resources Group believe that cutting those astronomical costs is a real possibility if patients are managed appropriately and receive comprehensive, ongoing chronic disease care.  Payers may save up to 19% of pharmacy and medical costs through population health management programs, which is an attractive reason to invest in preventative care.
Dig Deeper
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
ACP: Use Population Health to Combat Opioids, Substance Abuse
And the evidence increasingly shows that population health management programs do work.  More than 90% of primary care providers, endocrinologists, and managed care organizations (MCOs) participating in the survey are able to track the percentages of their diabetic patients by their A1c levels and can identify outliers in need of specialized interventions.  Providers estimate that the adherence rate of these patients increases by an average of 10% when they are enrolled in a population health program, further reducing costs.
Simple interventions such as providing text or email reminders to patients due for medication refills or check-in appointments have been shown to have a similarly impactful effect on costs and outcomes in other settings.  The Western New York Beacon Community saw a 26% decrease in the number of hospitalizations among their diabetic population after implementing a population health management that included patient registries, clinical analytics dashboards, and patient engagement tools.  The number of uncontrolled diabetics also dropped by more than 10% at some participating practices.
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


