Three HIEs Connect to Create “Patient-Centered Data Home”

January 05, 2017

By Thomas Beaton
January 05, 2017 - Three HIEs have established a long-term agreement to enhance health data interoperability, allowing a patient’s healthcare record to follow them across state lines.
The Indiana Health Information Exchange (IHIE), Michiana Health Information Network (MHIN), and East Tennessee Health Information Network (etHIN) are building a “Patient Centered Data Home (PCDH),” which aims to deliver data across state lines, and between disparate health systems to aid population health management, patient engagement, and patient safety. population health.
“This is an exciting first step toward a much larger goal,” said John Kansky, president and CEO of IHIE. “At the completion of this pilot, we’ll be exchanging health information among seven HIEs and across five states.”
The project, called the The Patient Centered Data Home (PCDH) Heartland initiative, is the third and largest pilot from the Strategic Health Information Exchange Collaborative (SHIEC.) The SHIEC acts as the project lead for the entire PCDH.
Dig Deeper
Will MACRA and the QPP Unlock Health Data for Smarter Care?
Are Health Data Interoperability Standards the Same in Theory as Practice?
Five Blockchain Use Cases for Healthcare Payers, Providers
The PCDH has other partners, which include Great Lakes Health Connect, HealthLinc, the Kentucky Health Information Exchange, and The Health Collaborative.
“Because of the tourism in East Tennessee, etHIN has medical data on patients from all 50 states and beyond who were treated by an etHIN participant while traveling here,” said Leigh Sterling, Executive Director of etHIN.
“The Heartland Project will allow us to notify the patient’s home health information exchange that a patient living there was treated in the etHIN region. Knowing about medical events that occur outside their local area will allow the hometown physicians to build a more complete patient medical record, thus providing more informed care for their patients.”
The PCDH project is funded by the ONC.
“Each of our organizations is successfully exchanging healthcare data with providers in our own communities,” said Kelly Hahaj, CEO of MHIN. “It makes sense that the next evolution is to connect our networks to enable a person’s medical information to be available whenever and wherever care occurs, appropriately and securely.”
Tagged EHR InteroperabilityHealth Information ExchangeHealthcare Data GovernanceHIE Use


