AMA Launches Diabetes Care Grants for Underserved Patients

November 04, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Seven clinics will receive grant money to help manage prediabetes in patients at risk of developing the costly chronic disease.
November 04, 2014 - The American Medical Association (AMA) and AmeriCares have announced a new chronic disease management program aiming to reduce the prevalence and delay the onset of Type 2 diabetes.  The collaboration will provide seven free or charitable clinics with $10,000 each to boost population health management programs focusing on obesity, weight loss, blood sugar control, and increased physical activity.
Over 400 needy patients will participate in the Transforming Prediabetes Care Initiative at one of the seven chosen clinics.  The clinics will use the funding to create a lifestyle coaching program to conduct outreach and education about prediabetes and the development of Type 2 diabetes based on standards provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) National Diabetes Prevention Program.
Patients will engage in a series of twenty-two coaching classes that measure physical activity, weight loss, and other health markers, and will continue with follow-up for one year.  The providers will also receive access to free medications and other supplies from AmeriCares.
“This program will build the capacity of participating free and charitable clinics, enhancing the quality of care they deliver and improving the outcomes of the low-income, uninsured patients they serve,” said AmeriCares Vice President of US Partnerships and Programs Leslie McGuire. “Our ultimate goal is to inform chronic care delivery strategies in free and charitable clinics nationwide and to highlight the high quality, effective services being provided by this critical but under recognized sector of the US health care safety net.”
Dig Deeper
Top 10 Challenges of Population Health Management
Real-Time Scheduling Data Helps BIDCO Manage Population Health
FDA Urges Opioids Guidelines to Stem “Biggest Public Health Crisis”
“The AMA is committed to raising awareness about prediabetes and ensuring patients at greatest risk are referred to proven diabetes prevention programs to help them prevent or delay diabetes,” added AMA President Robert M. Wah, MD. “Through our new collaboration with AmeriCares, we will be able to reach more patients in underserved areas who suffer disproportionately from poor health outcomes associated with prediabetes.”
A recent CDC report found that diabetes now affects close to 10% of the American population, but nearly 28% of diabetics are unaware that they have the disease and are not receiving treatment.  Eighty-six million adults are currently categorized as prediabetic, with between 15% and 30% of those patients anticipated to develop Type 2 diabetes within five years.
“These new numbers are alarming and underscore the need for an increased focus on reducing the burden of diabetes in our country,” said Ann Albright, PhD, RD, director of CDC’s Division of Diabetes Translation.  “Diabetes is costly in both human and economic terms. It’s urgent that we take swift action to effectively treat and prevent this serious disease.”  Diabetic patients currently incur $176 billion per year in direct costs and an additional $69 billion in indirect costs such as lost work and disability.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


