350 Kaiser Permanente Clinics Reach HIMSS Analytics Stage 7

January 23, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 23, 2015 - Hundreds of clinics in the Kaiser Permanente healthcare system have received the Stage 7 Ambulatory Award from HIMSS Analytics, recognizing their robust use of data analytics, health information exchange, and EHR infrastructure to foster population health management and improve the quality of patient care.  Joining just over 4% of ambulatory care sites across the nation, the Stage 7 award represents the highest level of health IT adoption on the HIMSS Analytics scale.
“We are proud to have our ambulatory clinics recognized as top performers by HIMSS Analytics,” said John E. Mattison, MD, chief medical information officer and assistant medical director, Kaiser Permanente Southern California. “This achievement is more than a testament to our technology, it is an example of the power of our integrated health care delivery system.  It is also a tribute to the doctors and nurses in every region who have worked so hard to constantly improve the safety and quality of the care they deliver to all of our members with our electronic health record.”
“Kaiser Permanente has clearly met and exceeded all criteria for an ambulatory Stage 7 organization. They have a complete electronic patient medical record with appropriate ubiquitous access to support patient care in all Kaiser Permanente facilities across the country,” added John P. Hoyt, FACHE, FHIMSS, executive vice president, HIMSS Analytics. “With world-class analytics, Kaiser Permanente has shown the value of a very comprehensive EHR and the business and clinical analytics to improve care, quality, safety and efficiency on a world-class basis.”
Kaiser Permanente is a regular in the HIMSS Analytics Stage 7 rankings for both the ambulatory and hospital EHR and analytics awards.  The system has had 37 hospitals reach Stage 7 over the past five years, more than any other health system, and has Stage 7 ambulatory sites in eight states.  The provider has been successful with its data analytics and population health measures due to its single, system-wide EHR infrastructure, KP HealthConnect, which helps to coordinate care for its 9.5 million members.
Dig Deeper
MIT Uses Deep Learning to Create ICU, EHR Predictive Analytics
AMA Launches Integrated Healthcare Big Data Analytics Platform
Humana: Can Artificial Intelligence, NLP, Voice Tools Revamp EHRs?
While the system experienced a data breach involving nearly 49,000 patients in 2013 and was recently required to pay out $4 million for mental health care violations related to its appointment setting procedures, it has also engaged in several research and infrastructure development partnerships that take advantage of its integrated and advanced EHR technology.
“Stage 7 certification sets a benchmark that all health care organizations should strive for when implementing their EHR systems,” said Dick Daniels, interim chief information officer, Kaiser Permanente. “We feel confident that our EHR adoption is improving care delivery throughout our integrated delivery system.
“During the certification process, it became clear that Kaiser Permanente continues to lead the industry in using health IT to improve care,” agreed Michael McNamara, MD, chief medical information officer, Kaiser Permanente Northwest. “The evaluation also identified a limited number of areas where we can improve, and we consider this peer feedback invaluable to our organizational goal of continuous improvement.”
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR AnalyticsEHR Use


