ACOs Must Have Better Data for Population Health Management

February 09, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 09, 2015 - The American Hospital Association (AHA) is urging CMS to follow through on proposed changes to the way Medicare Shared Savings Program (MSSP) accountable care organizations receive data about their beneficiaries.  In a letter addressed to outgoing CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner, the AHA points out the importance of robust, real-time data for population health management in risk-based reimbursement models as patient populations become increasingly complex.
“Our members are enthusiastic about the MSSP as one pathway to advance their ongoing efforts to transform care delivery through improved care coordination and financial accountability,” writes AHA Executive Vice President Rick Pollack. “We appreciate that CMS has acknowledged the importance of encouraging continued and enhanced participation in the program and reducing administrative burden for accountable care organizations (ACOs).”
In addition to supporting more financial benefits for ACOs that take on risk, as well as individualized assessments for organizations that have struggled to meet benchmarks, the AHA applauds CMS’s commitment to providing more beneficiary data to organizations in an effort to bolster their population health management efforts.
“The timeliness and accuracy of claims data from CMS has been a major challenge to the success of the ACO program,” Pollack says. “ACO providers need to know not only which Medicare beneficiaries are attributed to them, but also their utilization patterns in order to improve the quality and cost of their care.”
Dig Deeper
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Applications Close Sept. 15
CMS has proposed providing ACOs with a minimum data set about assigned beneficiaries that includes elements such as demographic information, risk profile, chronic condition type, details about utilization rates of Medicare services, and cost data about the services received.  Certain ACOs would also receive identifiable data for patients that visit a primary care provider during the beneficiary assignment period.
While the AHA approves of this step, “our MSSP ACO-participating hospitals have stressed that the data provided are inadequate, incomplete and often erroneous,” the letter states. “Moreover, the data are often six to nine months delayed. It is critical for an ACO to know its aligned beneficiaries on a monthly, not quarterly, basis. This is necessary to measure and track beneficiary utilization, as well as quality and financial indicators. Coordinating patient care must occur in real time, not retrospectively.”
“Moreover, access to timely Medicare claims data is necessary to obtain a complete picture of the care received by the beneficiary inside and outside of the ACO,” Pollack adds. “Finally, the inclusion of claims data related to behavioral health services would allow for better care coordination and management of high-risk patients.”
The AHA also applauds CMS for its intentions to streamline the beneficiary opt-out process for the sharing of claims data for population health management.  While the current process is “costly to perform and is confusing to Medicare beneficiaries,” the new system would require patients to call Medicare directly to tell the agency not to transmit their health information. “However, we recommend that, if an ACO is assigned beneficiaries who opt out of sharing their data, the beneficiaries should be removed during the financial reconciliation process since an ACO will be unable to coordinate effectively the care of these patients and should not be held financially accountable for them,” the letter says.
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsPopulation Health Management


