US, 26 countries to build disease monitoring infrastructure

February 14, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 14, 2014 - Diabetes and obesity might be the main epidemics currently threatening patients in the United States, but elsewhere in the world, serious infectious diseases take thousands of lives a year, with little technology to monitor, prevent, and treat these illnesses before they spread across borders and across the seas. The United States is teaming up with the World Health Organization and a group of 26 countries from around the world to build local technological infrastructures to help contain and even eliminate some of the most serious public health threats on the globe.
From rapidly mutating strains of swine and bird flu to socially destabilizing epidemics of cholera, malaria, and tuberculosis, new diseases “are just a plane ride away,” said Dr. Tom Frieden, Director of the CDC.  “”A much safer world really is within our reach, but there are too many blind spots around the world,” he continued, and it is difficult to keep tabs on hot spots when medical care is scarce and nearly always analog.
“Microbes and diseases are moving faster and farther than ever and one thing we know for certain: they do not recognize or stop at national borders,” added HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.  “A threat anywhere is indeed a threat everywhere.”  The CDC and Department of Defense plan to spend $40 million for similar projects in an additional ten countries, and President Obama is seeking a further $45 million to expand the work in 2015.
Fewer than 20% of countries are prepared to respond to an emergency epidemic situation, Sebelius said.  Many of the countries in the newly formed coalition, such as Vietnam, Kazakhstan, and Uganda, contain exceedingly remote populations that may not even have reliable roads year round.  Over the next five years, the US will partner with these countries to provide quick and accurate testing capabilities and a public health infrastructure to speed reporting and response for patients in hard-to-reach or very low-income areas.
Dig Deeper
Business Intelligence Tools Bring Insights to Organ Donation Network
Machine Learning to Fuel “Collective Intelligence” of Human Dx Project
Physician-Level Data May Not Reduce Opioid Prescription Rates
At the end of the five-year project, the CDC hopes that the partner countries will be able to accomplish a series of basic public health goals, including immunizing at least 90% of young children against measles, conducting real-time biosurveillance in at least 80% of the country’s geographical regions, maintain a public health emergency operations center that can mobilize within two hours of being alerted to a threat, and sustain at least one reference lab that can identify and report on emerging concerns and quickly contact international organizations.
Officials are hopeful that rapid progress is possible after the quick success of a pilot program started in Uganda last year.  With US aid, Uganda was able to expand its IT communications infrastructure and boost its lab processing capacity to tackle diseases like hemorrhagic fevers and cholera.  Samples were quickly shipped from remote regions to provincial capitals, where they were sent to labs for fast identification, allowing physicians to treat emerging threats before they spread even more widely.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


