Hospital readmissions decrease “whenever you try,” says Mayo

May 21, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 21, 2014 - Reducing the number of unnecessary hospital readmissions may be as easy as just paying attention, says research from the Mayo Clinic published in JAMA this month.  After reviewing more than forty trials related to interventions intended to cut the 30-day readmission rate among discharged patients, Dr. Aaron Lepper, a research associate at Mayo’s Knowledge and Evaluation Research Unit, found that pretty much anything that tried to account for a patient’s individual needs when creating a discharge plan was effective in helping that patient understand and adhere to his or her care regimen.
“When we pull together all of the studies, the overall effect is that in general, when you try to do something to reduce readmission rates, it will work,” Lepper said.  “It will reduce the rates by an average of about 20 percent.  There are certainly factors that seem to be most effective.  One of the big ones is an assessment of patient capacity.”
“We conceptualize patient capacity as all of the resources that a patient has to take care of themselves when they go home,” he continued.  “The most effective interventions are those that really look to assess and address limitations in patients: physical, financial, and mental limitations, including personal factors related to transportation or the environment they live in.  All of those things are important and affect wither or not a patient becomes overwhelmed with their care when they go home and therefore readmit to the hospital.”
Studies that involved more individuals in the process of care delivery and those that supported the patient’s capacity for self-care were 1.3 times more effective than other interventions for keeping patients at home, the review found.  Curiously, trials that were published before 2002, well in advance of the age of widespread EHR adoption and online patient access to health data, were 1.6 times more effective than studies published later.
Dig Deeper
Regional Variation Points Out Value of Antibiotic Stewardship
SC Online Population Health Dashboard Reveals Community Disparities
Time Needed to Improve Quality in Value-Based Care Programs
The findings are supported by unrelated studies that show that seniors hospitalized for more than two days need significant help in their basic decision making from family members or caregivers, with nearly 60% of those decisions involving life-sustaining care.  Seniors who experienced feelings of loneliness and social isolation are also notably more likely to experience precipitous declines in health and a higher likelihood of dementia and premature mortality, says a University of Chicago study, reinforcing the need for a care team to track and support patients when they leave the hospital.
“Effective approaches often are multifaceted and proactively seek to understand the complete patient context, often including in-person visits to the patient’s home after discharge,” Leppin added. “We need to address this issue because hospital readmissions have a big impact on our patients’ lives.”
Tagged Hospital ReadmissionsPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


