Lockheed Martin Health IT Alliance to Improve Population Health

July 31, 2015

By Sara Heath
July 31, 2015 - Health IT is an ever-growing business, and Lockheed Martin is jumping on the bandwagon by starting a partnership with five other prominent health IT providers, according to a Lockheed Martin press release. The members of the Lockheed Martin Healthcare Technology Alliance – Cicsco, Cloudera, Illumina, Intel, and Montgomery College – hope to innovate health IT to enhance quality of care, public health, and population health management.
“Federal health IT is a dynamic and growing sector,” said Horace Blackman, Vice President of Health & Life Sciences at Lockheed Martin. “Through collaboration between health IT industry and academic partners, this team will develop and refine technologies that will help guide decisions for care, diagnosis and treatment of disease while protecting critical health information.”
By improving on these healthcare IT systems, the alliance also hopes to improve care in three main sectors: securing sensitive patient information, improving genomic research, and using big data to improve medical research.
Other members of the Lockheed Martin Healthcare Technology Alliance look forward to this opportunity to improve healthcare IT.
Dig Deeper
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
“We are so pleased to be a part of this forward-thinking alliance,” said DeRionne P. Pollard, MD., President of Montgomery College. “Joining industry and academic research is the best way to spark innovation. Together, we can do great things.”
This isn’t the first time Lockheed Martin is taking part in healthcare IT innovation. In January, they announced a partnership with Illumina, a fellow member of the Lockheed Martin Healthcare Technology Alliance. This partnership sought out to develop and improve genomics research with the final goal to improve public health and population health management.
“Genomics is enabling a fundamental transformation of health care,” said Blackman. “We envision the advantages of early national adoption for countries across the globe, applying clinical decision support applications that can improve health and health care, and lower national health care costs.”
Lockheed Martin also made healthcare developments back in 2013, as reported by HealthITAnalytics.com. Being a company that normally specializes in national defense, Lockheed Martin put their analytics expertise to good use in the healthcare industry, as well. By applying their missile defense analytics practices, Lockheed Martin was able to gain insights into sepsis, something that at the time killed 40 percent of the individuals it affects each year.
Although Lockheed Martin is typically associated with their work in national defense, they are certainly making a splash in the healthcare IT community with their work to improve public health and population health management. Their recent partnerships that will further advance genomics research and health technology are intended to make equally significant improvements as their national defense research.
Tagged Big DataPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


