Senate Passes SGR Repeal, Embraces Value-Based Reimbursement

April 15, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 15, 2015 - Value-based reimbursement will largely be the new law of the land after the Senate stepped up to pass the Medicare Sustainable Growth Rate (SGR) repeal.  After keeping the healthcare industry holding its breath for a long two weeks during its spring recess, the Senate joined the House in approving the legislation by an overwhelming 92-8 vote.  Industry stakeholders erupted into relieved praise of the vote, with many leaders hailing the legislation as “historic” and “monumental.”  The SGR repeal is immensely meaningful not just for physicians who will now avoid a 21 percent Medicare payment cut, but also for the value-based reimbursement movement as a whole.
“Passage of this historic legislation finally brings an end to an era of uncertainty for Medicare beneficiaries and their physicians—facilitating the implementation of innovative care models that will improve care quality and lower costs,” said James L. Madara, MD, Chief Executive Officer and Executive Vice President of the American Medical Association. “Patients will be able to get the care they need and deserve.”
President Obama has said that he is eager to sign the bill, which significantly revamps reimbursement structures while simplifying the administrative burdens of participating in Medicare’s myriad quality reporting programs.
In addition to eliminating the yearly threat of deep cuts to fee-for-service Medicare payments, the legislation makes it easier for providers to participate in the newly unified Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS), which streamlines participation in existing EHR Incentive Programs, Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS), and Value-Based Modifier (VBM) programs, allowing providers to attest only once on regularly updated clinical quality measures.
Providers will also have the chance to accrue financial bonuses by participating in innovative care delivery models like the patient-centered medical home (PCMH).  These delivery reforms promote population health management, better care coordination, and the increased use of health information exchange and clinical analytics for patient risk stratification and more comprehensive preventative care.  The SGR repeal allows for a five percent bonus for those providers who will accrue at least a quarter of their Medicare revenue through alternative care models and value-based reimbursement arrangements by 2018.
READ MORE: CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
“As a long-time supporter of value-based reimbursement, we are pleased to see the PCMH recognized in this significant legislation as an APM and as a way to improve access to continuous, coordinated, and patient-centered primary care,” said Patient-Centered Primary Care Collaborative (PCPCC) Chief Executive Officer Marci Nielsen in a press release.  “We are thrilled Congress took action to officially repeal the flawed SGR formula. This monumental legislation signifies a major step forward in moving America toward a more comprehensive payment system that rewards value-based payment and quality of care.”
Stakeholders from across the industry clambered to express their optimism that the value-based reimbursement framework included in the legislation will make a significant impact on the quality and provision of patient care.
“Mayo Clinic is pleased with today’s bipartisan action,” said President and CEO John Noseworthy, MD. “Mayo has actively supported the repeal and replacement of the SGR for years. This ends 17 years of uncertainty for hospitals and physicians and moves Medicare towards paying for quality and efficiency. This is important for patients, taxpayers and long-term solvency of Medicare. The road to value-based payment will be challenging. We believe the next step must be to develop performance measures that accurately differentiate levels of care and complexity of patients.”
The American Society of Clinical Oncology added, “ASCO applauds Congressional leaders for passing legislation that eliminates the SGR and begins the process of real Medicare reform; and the society looks forward to working with policymakers to ensure that this new law is effectively implemented and paves the way to new payment models that foster high-quality, value-based health care for all Americans with cancer.”
The American Academy for Family Physicians celebrated the newfound financial stability that the SGR repeal will bring to primary care providers, many of whom have taken big budgetary hits from EHR adoption and participation in the EHR Incentive Programs, sometimes seen as a necessary evil by those providers who wish to continue seeing Medicare patients without incurring penalties for non-participation.
READ MORE: Medicaid Savings Require Integrated Physical, Mental Healthcare
“For more than a decade, elderly and disabled Americans didn’t know whether they would continue to receive the medical care they needed. They couldn’t count on whether they could see the physician they’d had for years. But with today’s passage of the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA), these patients can put those worries behind them,”  said Robert Wergin, MD, President of the AAFP.
“Medicare beneficiaries comprise one out of four patients in a typical family physician’s practice; for some, elderly and disabled patients constitute six out of 10 of their patients.  These individuals depend on their family physicians for preventing illness, treating problems if they do arise, coordinating with other health care team members, and ensuring the right treatment from the right professional at the right time. By passing MACRA, Congress has ensured uninterrupted health access security to their elderly and disabled constituents.”
In conjunction with the recently released Stage 3 meaningful use proposed rule, which also stresses patient-centered, value-based care driven by clinical analytics and health information exchange, the healthcare industry is rapidly building momentum towards a revolution in the interplay between care and payment.
Many providers who have already dipped a toe in the waters of accountable care have sent back favorable reports including improvements in quality, outcomes, and financial sustainability, but the SGR repeal’s major, comprehensive changes to the nation’s largest payer may produce some growing pains before it’s through.  The stage may be set for transformation, but the real work is yet to come as providers try to change their deeply-seated inertia and pull themselves into the new era of value-based reimbursement.
Tagged Accountable CareQuality Of CareRevenue Cycle Management


