Users Opt for Integrated EHR, Population Health, RCM Platforms

May 04, 2018

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 04, 2018 - Integrated electronic health record (EHR), population health management, and revenue cycle management (RCM) platforms are receiving top marks in user satisfaction from a growing number of organizations investing in all-in-one health IT tools, says Black Book in a new survey.
Eighty-six percent of users in hospital networks expressed confidence that these integrated platforms are helping to prepare them for value-based care, and now feel ready to take on the challenges of risk-based reimbursements.
In sharp contrast, only 18 percent of users who utilize separate EHR, population health, and RCM products feel the same level of readiness, the survey found.
Dig Deeper
Machine Learning Can Quiet “Building Crescendo” of EHR Dissatisfaction
Verma: CMS Will “Use Every Lever” for Promoting Interoperability, Data Access
HCOs Falling Short of Population Health, Value-Based Care Goals
Just under 80 percent of these multi-product users report unresolved issues with product integration and interoperability. 
They also found lower adoption rates of functionalities within these tools, which may contribute to feelings of unease around the big data analytics, financial savvy, and patient management strategies required to succeed in a value-based environment.
As a result, healthcare systems, especially integrated delivery networks (IDNs) and chain hospitals with smaller facilities, may be in the market for unified platforms that will enhance data visibility and holistic patient management.
Just under two-thirds of these organizations have not yet adopted a full-system technology suite, says Black Book.  Seventy percent of those health systems are actively looking for single-source vendors as they move into the second quarter of 2018.
High expectations will guide the vendor selection process.  Organizations are demanding functionalities that include coordinated billing and claims processing, seamless interoperability, and exceptional clinician usability.
Vendors that have prioritized the development of these features have already secured a positive reputation among integrated health IT platform consumers, added the poll.
For 2018, Allscripts receives top honors, based on aggregate client experience and customer satisfaction scores, Black Book stated. 
Other vendors offering highly respected EHR, population health, and RCM platforms include MEDITECH, Cerner, McKesson, Epic Systems, and CPSI.
Tagged EHR AdoptionPopulation Health ManagementRevenue Cycle ManagementValue Based CareValue Based Reimbursement


