UPMC Wins Award for Healthcare Big Data Analytics Excellence

November 02, 2015

By Sara Heath
November 02, 2015 - The University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC) Health Plan has been awarded the Excellence in Analytics Award by the International Institute for Analytics (IIA) for its exemplary healthcare big data analytics programs.  According to a recent press release, the UPMC Health Plan received this award at the Chief Analytics Officer Summit held last month.
The Excellence in Analytics Award is awarded to healthcare companies who display extraordinary skill in the healthcare big data analytics industry through various initiatives. This year, the UPMC Health Plan has been honored for its work with its Learning Engine tool, a tool that provides support for the health plan’s providers in updating clinical analytics and delivering continuous high quality care.
Led by Pamela Peele, PhD, Vice President of Health Economics and Chief Analytics Officer for UPMC Health Plan, the award-winning Learning Engine tool has provided added support to both patients and clinicians throughout the healthcare facility.
"UPMC Health Plan is a shining example of how to advance analytics and derive measurable impact," said Jack Phillips, Co-Founder and CEO of IIA. "We salute Dr. Peele and her team and congratulate them on winning."
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Clinical Decision Support May Boost ID of Chronic Kidney Disease
Officials from UPMC Health Plan expressed excitement about receiving such an honor.
"UPMC Health Plan is delighted to receive this honor and humbled to be in the company of the other outstanding finalists," said Peele. "It is rewarding to be acknowledged for an innovative tool that helps our members and enables our clinicians."
Other honorees and finalists for the Excellence in Analytics Award include Dignity Health, Dow Chemical, Enova International, and XL Catlin.
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsClinical Analytics


