HHS, feds must do more to open health data to industry

July 24, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 24, 2014 - The federal government produces enormous quantities of clinical and financial health data, but hasn’t done enough to be transparent with the wealth of information it is currently holding, argued Mary R. Grealy, President of the Health Leadership Council (HLC) in front of the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Health.  Since entities such as Medicare and Medicaid are funded by taxpayers, allowing researchers and clinical analytics professionals to access the data generated by these organizations is necessary to maximize public benefits.
“Federal ‘data use agreement’ restrictions keep many healthcare organizations from gaining access to data that would allow them to improve care and reduce costs,” Grealy said on Wednesday during her testimony.  “By allowing regular access to data at minimal cost to organizations that are subject to consumer protection laws, organizations throughout the country can develop novel ways to fight disease, improve the quality of care, reduce costs and accelerate innovation.  We encourage increased coordination among federal government agencies to reduce data ‘silos.’”
The Health Leadership Council brings together executives from the full spectrum of healthcare industry stakeholders, including hospitals, payers, developers and vendors, researchers, and academic health centers.  In discussions with other industry leaders, HLC has helped to develop a set of data policy principles that can help the federal government become a partner in the quest to improve outcomes, reduce spending, and coordinate care through clinical analytics and other data-driven efforts.
The federal government should encourage standards and best practices for health data sharing across its many parts, Grealy explained, and engage industry leaders in discussions about where data sharing restrictions would be appropriate.  Government data on healthcare delivery innovations, especially the impact of new reimbursement models, should be available to researchers, even if they have a commercial interest in the data.
Dig Deeper
Machine Learning Algorithm Outperforms Cardiologists Reading EKGs
Big Data Analytics Resource Center Takes Aim at Pediatric Cancer
Geisinger Announces New National Precision Health Initiative
“Healthcare organizations are using advanced data analytics to improve healthcare quality, better manage population health and address consumer health needs using private-sector patient-level data. These organizations can enhance their work with appropriate access to federal program data. Commercial entities could easily be held to the same Data Use Agreement standards as noncommercial entities,” she pointed out.
“As partners to the federal government in national efforts to improve care while lowering costs, private sector organizations should have access to the tools needed for success,” Grealy concluded.  “Any standard that essentially bars access to this critical data is, in fact, detrimental to the larger goals of our healthcare system and our shared societal goals.”
Tagged Big DataClinical AnalyticsHealthcare Data StrategyMedical Research


