How to Avoid the Five Biggest Risks of ICD-10 Implementation

March 11, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 11, 2015 - The healthcare industry has taken on more than its fair share of risky health IT projects in recent years, but few have come with quite as many unknowns as ICD-10 implementation.  No two organizations are alike when it comes to the wide-ranging impacts of the new code set, which purports to bring detail and specificity to healthcare data in order to bring more accurate payments and the potential for improved clinical analytics.
Coupled with the uncertainty of the shifting deadline and strong, continued opposition from certain influential groups, it’s hardly a surprise that preparation has been onerous, to say the least.
But as providers get closer to accepting that October 1, 2015 may truly be the go-live date they have been waiting for (or dreading), healthcare leaders are slowly turning their attention to what might happen after.  With the American Medical Association urging CMS to do more to prepare providers for the aftermath of the switch, “contingency planning” is suddenly back in vogue.
What are some of the biggest risks of ICD-10 implementation and how can healthcare organizations ensure that they have strategies in place to mitigate the worst of them?
Insufficient participation in end-to-end testing
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
Medicare end-to-end testing may have the highest profile in the industry at the moment, but providers who were not ready or not selected to participate in this spring’s testing opportunities should still investigate testing opportunities with their private payers and partners.  While organizations should not count on their EHR and practice management vendors to do most of the heavy lifting when it comes to ICD-10 preparation, some vendors are offering testing help that can take the sting out of the anxiety.
In October of 2014, Cerner held a full-scale testing event for some of its clients which helped participating organizations, like Nash Health Care System in North Carolina, identify conversion issues that needed to be addressed.
“[We] felt that this validated the other types of testing that we had done, and really made us feel like we were ready for the event,” said Ken Kilmer, ICD-10 Project Manager at Nash Health Care.  “It was a good event because it not only tested the process of converting, but it allowed us to test just the end-to-end capabilities of our systems to produce a claim in an ICD-10 world and to process the patient producing the claim.”
ZirMed announced the results of a similar project in January after taking it on themselves to conduct end-to-end testing with commercial health plans throughout 2014. “Once providers have a round of ICD-10 testing under their belt, they realize that ICD-10 is not as horrific as they thought it would be,” said Betty Gomez, Director of Regulatory Strategy. “Currently, the biggest challenge facing providers seems to be the lack of payers offering ICD-10 testing, limiting providers’ options for testing opportunities.”
Healthcare organizations should seek out end-to-end testing opportunities now in order to give themselves enough time to go through the testing process and make necessary changes based on the results.  Software cycles are long and resources are scarce, which makes the window for retooling infrastructure very tight indeed.
READ MORE: Nurse Informaticists Can “Triage” EHR Optimization Problems
Providers are reminded that they may participate in Medicare acknowledgement testing at their leisure and without an invitation.  They may also wish to contact their clearinghouses, payers, and vendors to learn about any testing opportunities that may be available over the next few months.
Overlooking clinical documentation improvement
Technical testing isn’t the only task that has the potential to trip up providers during the race to October 1.  Poor clinical documentation that cannot support the detail and specificity required to get to the most accurate ICD-10 code will be just as much of a stumbling block for healthcare providers.  Luckily, the implementation of a clinical documentation improvement program can be done fairly quickly and can also have broad positive impacts on revenue cycle management in general.
Within just one year, a small community hospital in Arizona used its CDI efforts to gain more than half a million dollars in legitimate revenue by paying closer attention to DRG assignments and getting to the root of clinical documentation issues: the difference between what physicians thought they were documenting and what coders actually needed to do their jobs.
“Most of the issue that I’ve seen is a difference between ‘doctor-speak’ and the language of coding,” said Clinical Documentation Specialist Mandy Rogers, RN.  “Sometimes the physicians don’t quite get the difference between what the coders do and what we do, and they don’t always get why we’re querying them.  That’s where I’ve noticed the biggest gap of understanding.”
READ MORE: Nurses Play a Critical Role in EHR Optimization, Data Governance
Explaining to physicians why clinical documentation improvement is important for more than just ICD-10 can ease the stress of continually changing workflows and prompt clinicians to make adjustments to their habits that can bring in extra revenue in addition to meeting the ICD-10 standards intended to improve clinical data integrity.
Stalled payments and increased denials
The anticipation of negative revenue cycle impacts is one of the biggest challenges of ICD-10.  Warnings about stalled payments, unanticipated denials, and decreased productivity have struck fear into the hearts of providers ever since the ICD-10 switch was first announced, and the industry has tried to come up with some creative solutions to the problem.
While CMS has quashed the notion of a dual-coding grace period after the transition, the American Medical Association has suggested that payers issue advanced payments, “which are nothing more than reimbursement outside of the normal claims processing system for services already rendered, such as paper checks) to physicians experiencing a dire financial hardship as a result of the change to ICD-10, particularly if the issue originates on Medicare’s end,” the AMA said in a recent letter.
CMS, meanwhile, has downplayed the possibility of major disruptions originating with Medicare, pointing to generally successful testing rates and the fact its systems have been vetted and prepared for the transition.
The nation’s biggest private payers have also affirmed their readiness for ICD-10 implementation, and they have no interest in penalizing providers for not getting ICD-10 right.  “Payers want this transition to run smoothly, too,” said AAFP private sector advocacy strategist Laura Schmidt in March. “They’ve invested a lot of time and money into the ICD-10 implementation, just as family physicians have. The bottom line is that no business, big or small, involved in this effort can afford a slowdown in its billing and payment processes.”
Preparation, preparation, and more preparation is the only surefire way to mitigate the risk of a big hit to the revenue cycle.  However, healthcare providers who are still worried about claims and payment issues that are out of their hands should assess their liquid assets and the potential to access credit during the transition period.  Conducting a thorough review of revenue cycle management and resource utilization before ICD-10 implementation may help organizations shift their budgets to allow for a little breathing room come October 1.
Missing EHR and practice management software upgrades
Unfortunately, sluggish development from the vendor community has put many providers in the awkward position of being willing and ready to prepare for ICD-10 but missing the software that will allow them to do it.  Vendor preparedness is the one ICD-10 implementation risk that is more or less out of a provider’s hands, and it can be supremely frustrating.
“Physicians who bill Medicare are required to use a certified electronic health record (EHR); otherwise, they face a financial penalty under the MU program,” the AMA pointed out in its letter. “The Version 2014 certified software is required to accommodate ICD-10 codes; yet, many EHR vendors were behind in delivering upgrades to physicians in 2014 to meet the MU program. There is no data that indicates when vendors will be ready to deliver the ICD-10 upgrades and what help will be available for physicians whose vendors decided not to certify to 2014.”
Industry leaders such as WEDI are trying to gather information on the state of the vendor community’s readiness to deliver ICD-10 upgrades, but the little existing data is relatively grim.  After the ICD-10 implementation date was pushed back from 2014 to 2015, an HFA survey revealed how little providers trusted their business partners to support each other during the transition.  Twelve percent of hospitals and healthcare systems responding to the poll were worried about the readiness of the vendor community.
Later in 2014, WEDI found that a similar number of vendors are less than halfway done with product development.  More than a quarter of vendors expected to be done with development at some point in 2015 or don’t even have a workable deadline.
For providers who are still waiting on upgrades, the best thing they can do is get on the phone with their vendors and don’t hang up until they get an answer.  Organizations may also wish to consider outsourcing as many preparation activities as possible to keep the preparation process moving, and to focus on educational activities, CDI, and training for coders and physicians while working out the more technical kinks.
Not taking the deadline seriously…this time
Above all, providers must keep moving.  It may be hard to think seriously about October 1, 2015 when October 1, 2013 and October 1, 2014 both came and went without incident, but the healthcare industry is getting very close to finally pulling the trigger this time.  Another delay is always possible, if naysayers in Congress triumph once again, but that’s a risk that most providers can’t keep affording to take.
“US healthcare data is deteriorating while at the same time demand is increasing for high-quality data to support healthcare initiatives such as the Meaningful Use EHR Incentive Program, value-based purchasing, and other initiatives aimed at improving quality and patient safety and decreasing costs,” said the growing Coalition for ICD-10 in January.  In order to further the nation’s goals for reducing healthcare costs, increasing accountable care, raising quality, and becoming more patient-centered, the industry needs a firm foundation of robust clinical data with high levels of integrity and detail to support population health management, healthcare analytics, and meaningful interoperability.
Organizations that are still not sure if they are going to move full steam ahead in the remaining months of 2015 must quickly make a decision if they want to have any hope of catching up to their forward-thinking peers.  The ICD-10 implementation process is a lengthy and complicated one that requires a high level of commitment and dedication.  With so little time remaining if the 2015 deadline holds, healthcare organizations that are still holding back out of trepidation or uncertainty may be setting themselves up for failure – and even more implementation costs.
The financial impact of the most recent ICD-10 could amount to $6.8 billion, HHS has estimated, and additional delays could double that figure again.  In comparison to the few thousand dollars that many organizations are spending on ICD-10 preparation, moving ahead with the code set seems like a better proposition for all involved.
“How can we as a nation assess hospital outcomes, pay fairly, ensure accurate performance reports, and embrace value-based care if our coded data doesn’t provide such basic information?” the Coalition for ICD-10 wondered. “Our national healthcare data is broken due to the use of an archaic coding system.   It is hard to fathom why anyone would promote having our national data fail to meet the demands of 21st century health care.”
  Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


