What are the obstacles that prevent good healthcare analytics?

September 03, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 03, 2013 - There’s a strange and irritating paradox involved in analytics: despite being based on gleaning information from large databases, the more data you have, the harder it is to make sure that the data is pure and that you’re gaining useful insights from it.  And that’s if you can even get the data at all.  Between unstructured clinical information locked in freeform physician notes to proprietary EHR data formats that might not translate into readable information for analytics software to gathering the IT and HIM staff to appropriately manipulate, read, and act on the output, no part of the process is simple.
Even just making the business case to hospital executives can be a challenge.  Breaking down silos of information stored in disparate systems might involve a large upfront investment in technology upgrades, and hiring health information managers adds length to the payroll.  Hospitals and health systems are already mired in healthcare payment reform, Medicare reporting measures, and increasing demands on staff efficiency and quality.  It takes a smart executive team to realize that integrating analytics can help solve those problems, not add to the burden.
This often involves an organizational culture shift towards valuing analytics and informatics.  A 2010 study from MIT Sloan Management Review and IBM Institute of Business Value showed that even in the infancy of EHR adoption and meaningful use, 90% of the most successful hospitals and executives were placing a heavy emphasis on analytics in the coming years, as opposed to 65% of underperforming facilities, many of which are now at risk for Medicare payment deductions due to poor quality and high preventable readmissions.  Top performers were about 20 percentage points more likely to use data to guide future strategy, take a rigorous approach to organizational decision making, and accomplish financial objectives.
“Think of the power of that in healthcare where you’re talking about somebody’s health, which is by definition a very data-intensive endeavor,” says Tom Olenzak, Director of Innovation at Independence Blue Cross. “You think about the amount of data that is generated around your health — not just doctor’s visits — claim history, labs, scripts (both filled and unfilled), diagnoses, and even things that are not thought of as traditional healthcare.”  Gathering that varied data into a coherent and computer-readable form has never been possible before, and many analytics solutions vendors are still trying to come up with ways to manage it cheaply and efficiently.
Dig Deeper
Epic EHR, Big Data Tools Bring 2016 HIMSS Davies Award to Mercy
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
Project to Develop EHR Toolkit to Stem Readmissions
But for hospitals without excess resources, or those so focused on mandated reforms that they’re barely making ends meet, analytics may be a step too far for them to reach.  “Competing priorities” is a familiar phrase for survey-browsers when it comes to everything from EHR adoption to ICD-10 to accountable care, and it’s a valid claim for many beleaguered providers to make.  “You look at your average provider — whether it’s a primary care physician or a specialist — and with everything going on there, there so overworked that any new wrinkle that you introduce into the workflow is going to be an issue,” adds Olenzak.
Integrating analytics into business and clinical decision making can be a rocky road that requires a lot of muscle and a keen determination to see the benefits through the haze of cost and risk.  As health systems slide more of their financial well-being into value-based payments and preventative, coordinated care, analytics should become more of a necessity than an aspiration.
But in this burgeoning industry, where defining what the data consists of is still as difficult as doing anything with it, obstacles remain to true integration and data-based decision making for clinical and executive staff.
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


