Illinois Health Information Exchange Hits 1 Million Records

February 27, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 27, 2015 - The MetroChicago Health Information Exchange has accomplished in six months what many other HIEs are still trying to achieve: the secure exchange of data covering one million patient lives in its designated local region.  The Illinois-based HIE, affiliated with the MCHC – Chicago Hospital Council, announced the milestone this week after connecting its millionth patient at the beginning of February.
“In near-record-breaking fashion, we have effectively enabled more than a million Chicago-area patients to have their protected personal health information available at a moment’s notice to other providers participating in the MetroChicago HIE,” said Dan Yunker, President and CEO of MCHC.
“Hitting this milestone in such short order shows the confidence that our participants have in this service, and in its ability to help them provide the highest quality of care to the communities they serve,” he added. “We believe that as consumers experience the benefits of having their information connected and available, they will seek care from providers who are using the most current and effective technology, like the MetroChicago HIE.”
More than nine million people live in the Chicago metropolitan area, and the benchmark is just the beginning of the HIE’s planned progress.  But connections with three of Illinois’ other regional health information exchange organizations and the National eHealth Exchange can help to provide care coordination coverage for a wider population of patients.
Dig Deeper
CVS Retail Clinics, VA Partner for Care Coordination, Access
SHIEC Expands Patient-Centered Data Home HIE Network Nationwide
How Data-Driven Care Management Improves Population Health in NC
“MetroChicago HIE has afforded us a tremendous opportunity for continued enhancement of patient care and increased cost-effectiveness for our patients and our organization,” said Michael S. Eesley, President and CEO of Centegra Health System, a member of the HIE. “We certainly look forward to our future work with the HIE, and we congratulate them on exceeding one million patient records.”
Tagged Care CoordinationHealth Information ExchangeHealthcare Data Strategy


