North, South Carolina Partner for Chronic Disease Management

June 03, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 03, 2015 - North and South Carolina are presenting a united front in the fight to improve chronic disease management throughout their shared territories with a $15.3 million collaborative grant intended to help reduce the burden of diabetes, hypertension, obesity, and other critical population health management issues on patients in both states. 
The grant, presented by North Carolina’s The Duke Endowment to Health Sciences South Carolina, a population health research partnership, will provide ongoing support to healthcare providers, academic organizations, and community leaders as they increase the use of clinical analytics and health IT infrastructure to tackle the costs and impacts of chronic disease and ongoing health disparities.
“Health is our most precious commodity, and chronic diseases threaten not just health, but also the economic and social health of the Carolinas,” said Minor Shaw, chair of The Duke Endowment Board of Trustees. “These problems are solvable, which is why The Duke Endowment has made a third investment in HSSC to further efforts to convene the best and brightest researchers, clinicians and strategic partners across the two states.
The $15.3 million grant is the third in a series of funding injections from The Duke Foundation, following a $21 million gift in 2006 and a further $11.25 million in 2011.  “This grant empowers them with the technical infrastructure and analytical resources needed to identify and implement meaningful solutions to the health-related challenges facing us today,” Shaw added.
Dig Deeper
Epic Systems, Cerner Remain Leading Population Health Companies
Data Analytics, Agile Implementation Speed Healthcare Quality Improvement
Physicians Seek Population Health, RCM Advice for Value-Based Care
The Carolinas have some of the higher rates of diabetes in the nation, with 11.4 percent of North Carolina and 12.5 percent in South Carolina diagnosed with the disease as of 2013, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation reports.  More than one in three residents is obese, and close to 40 percent suffer from hypertension.
HSSC works with some of the region’s most prominent healthcare and academic organizations, including the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Duke University, the Medical University of South Carolina, Clemson University, and Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center to provide support and best practices as healthcare providers build clinical analytics and population health management infrastructure to support more thorough care coordination and chronic disease management capabilities.
“HSSC has shown that in South Carolina, with the right IT infrastructure and tools, university-health system collaborations are more effective at improving health through data-driven action and research, and are more competitive in securing external funding for that research,” said HSSC President and CEO Dr. Helga Rippen.
“We are pleased The Duke Endowment shares our vision to expand and enhance the incredible infrastructure we’ve built together across South Carolina,” she continued. “HSSC welcomes the opportunity to work even more closely with North Carolina’s universities and health systems to address the serious health issues that threaten our states.”
The grant will also help HSSC expand its Learning Health Community to include community health organizations and other social service providers that could better use healthcare analytics to reduce disparities, target interventions, and provide more comprehensive care to patients facing multiple socioeconomic and health-related challenges.
“There are no easy answers to today’s complex health problems. HSSC looks forward to expanding our role by providing tools and infrastructure to those eager to make good health possible for all in the Carolinas,” Rippen said.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


