MD Health Systems Collaborate for Population Health Management

February 27, 2015

By Stephanie Reardon
February 27, 2015 - In Maryland, five major health systems have formed the Advanced Health Collaborative (AHC), an organization that will aim to improve the quality of care, reduce costs and improve population health management. The AHC members are Adventist HealthCare, LifeBridge Health, Mercy Health Services, Peninsula Regional Health System and Trivergent Health Alliance which includes Frederick Regional Health System, Meritus Health, and Western Maryland Health System, which have a combined total of ten hospitals.
The establishment of AHC comes after the January 2014 implementation of a new value-based reimbursement structure for all Maryland hospitals. This new system provides hospitals with a standardized reimbursement rate based on the number of patients in the population each hospital services.  The population health reimbursement plan replaces the traditional fee-for-service method of payment.
“For Maryland hospitals, the shift to the global budget system requires a whole new way of thinking and doing business, which can be both exciting and daunting,” explains Robb Cohen, AHC Chief Executive Officer. “We believe that by sharing ideas and working together, AHC members will be more successful in transitioning to this new model of care and achieve faster and better results. This will ultimately benefit their health systems, physicians and other care providers, but, most importantly, it will be a valuable asset for the people in Maryland.”
The change in the reimbursement system altered Maryland hospitals’ focus from pay per service to value-based care. Providers now focus less on their patient volumes and more on providing a higher quality of care. This aims to help hospitals improve the quality of care for the population they serve.
Dig Deeper
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
“Population health and the need for improved care coordination represent a new era for Maryland health systems. As these hospitals seek to navigate these changing waters, AHC will work with our members on potential projects to help them achieve these goals,” says Cohen. “AHC initiatives could involve collaborations on population health and care coordination programs, and could include cost savings through shared population health and care coordination resources or services,”
AHC members will benefit from collaborating with other organizations to efficiently manage healthcare changes. Members will be able to maintain their individuality while still benefiting from the collaboration. AHC may advocate for its members in state and federal discussions that could impact these hospital systems. AHS may also seek out other healthcare facilities to improve statewide health. Members of AHC will work together to efficiently manage healthcare changes and challenges through shared knowledge.
“By joining together in the Advanced Health Collaborative, we plan to harness the collective strengths of our members, putting them in a stronger position to advance common interests and goals, including providing higher quality care with greater cost efficiency,” said Cohen.
Tagged Population HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


