ONC’s 10-year plan: Big data, analytics, population health

June 09, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 09, 2014 - The Office of the National Coordinator’s (ONC) 10-year interoperability plan offers a vision of the healthcare ecosystem founded upon data analytics, population health management, and health information exchange.  Announced by National Coordinator Karen DeSalvo last week, the long-term roadmap hopes to continue the transformation of the paper-based healthcare system into a truly connected network of coordinated organizations working together to achieve safe, high quality, data-driven care.
“Over the past decade, there has been dramatic progress in adoption and use of health IT across the nation,” DeSalvo wrote in a blog post announcing the roadmap.  But, she adds, “there is much work to do to see that every person and their care providers can get appropriate health information in an electronic format when and how they need it to make care convenient and well-coordinated and allow for improvements in overall health.”
By building upon a firm foundation of EHR adoption and the budding analytics infrastructure that allows providers to manipulate and analyze patient data, the ONC hopes to guide the industry towards a stronger core of data standards and technical optimization by building upon established rules of governance and engagement.
“By 2024, individuals, care providers, communities, and researchers should have an array of interoperable health IT products and services that allow the healthcare system to continuously learn and advance the goal of improved healthcare,” the roadmap prognosticates.  “This ‘learning health system’ should also enable lower healthcare costs, improved population health, truly empower consumers, and drive innovation.”
Dig Deeper
CVS Retail Clinics, VA Partner for Care Coordination, Access
Faulkner Guides Epic Systems from EHR to Comprehensive Health Record
Addressing Opioid Abuse with Analytics, Population Health Strategies
Patients will have the ability to securely find, send, and receive essential personal health information, DeSalvo says, and providers will have the capability and motivation to accept and analyze patient-generated health data.   Certifications will ensure that technology meets high standards of interoperability and usefulness, while increased data exchange will help providers access the right information at the right time, directly at the point of care.
Within the next three years, the ONC hopes to leverage HIE to lower costs and improve quality on a large scale, the roadmap says.  Improving interoperability and providing users with the ability to search for and retrieve health information through query-based HIE models will be critical priorities.  True HIE can only be achieved when organizations adopt data governance standards to standardize the structure of essential information.  “We will also address critical issues such as data provenance, data quality and reliability, and patient matching to improve the quality of interoperability, and therefore facilitate an increased quantity of information movement,” ONC adds.
In six years, the focus will shift to using the fluidity of health data to promote population health management.  Community care providers will be able to work with primary care organizations, hospitals, and specialists to coordinate care for patients, while the proliferation of clinical data registries, claims databases, and data analytics tools will blend with EHR data to allow providers to stratify patients according to risk, target disease hotspots, and identify care gaps to reduce disparities and flag opportunities for improvement.
“These building blocks are interdependent and progress must be incremental across all of them over the next decade to realize this vision,” DeSalvo writes.  “We will collaboratively develop use cases and goals for three, six and ten-year timeframes that will guide work in each of the building blocks, including alignment and coordination of prioritized federal, state, tribal, local, and private sector actions.”
  Tagged Big DataHealth Information ExchangeHealthcare AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


