ACA prompts healthcare utilization study in New Jersey

January 31, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 31, 2014 - The influx of new patients receiving insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act has prompted White House analysts to partner with healthcare providers in New Jersey on how service utilization will change under the new law.  The work is being funded by a $450,000 grant from the John and James Knight Foundation, and will hopefully illuminate how patients are changing their service patterns to help providers allocate resources and save money.
“On the 2012 Obama campaign, our analytics team consolidated critical data from across the organization into a single database and used that resource to run one of the most successful and efficient campaigns in U.S. history,” said Erek Dyskant, a co-founder of BlueLabs, the data team collaborating with the Camden Coalition of Healthcare Providers on the work. “Now, we’re using the same techniques to make community health programs more effective.”
The researchers have developed a tool called the Camden Health Explorer, which aggregates and analyses deidentified claims data for services performed in emergency rooms, community health centers, and outpatient clinics.  The data can be broken down into geographic and demographic categories to give the team a detailed picture of which patients are going where.
Data from 2008 on the Camden Health website shows that patients were often making multiple trips per year to the emergency room, while providers have only collected on about 12% of the costs these patients incur.  Eighty percent of healthcare costs were generated by just 13% of patients, representing a clear opportunity to target community health programs to repeat ER users who could benefit instead from primary care.
Dig Deeper
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
CMS Selects 516 Orgs for Population Health Management Program
“By creating an open source of anonymous data, the Explorer will inform broader, important discussion about the health of entire communities,” said Aaron Truchil, manager of research for the Camden Coalition. “This tool will leverage the data generated during patient care to improve the efficiency of community-level health programs, enabling organizations to make smarter decisions, ranging from deciding where to locate a new clinic or what language should be used to run a diabetes class.”
Tagged Care CoordinationPatient CarePopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


