Top EHR Data Interoperability, Clinical Analytics Pain Points

October 30, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
While EHR adoption has hit the big leagues, data interoperability, clinical analytics, and population health management are still significantly lagging behind.
October 30, 2014 - Hospital executives and clinical end-users continue to add to the growing chorus of dissatisfaction with the stunted clinical analytics capabilities of EHRs.  Stakeholders express frustration with the way EHR data is stored, retrieved, analyzed, and transmitted, citing poor search abilities, slow query processing, and an inability to perform robust analytics on unstructured data among their chief complaints.
Despite the nearly universal belief that health IT interoperability is the key to achieving the healthcare industry’s lofty goals for widespread data exchange, better care coordination, improved outcomes, and reduced costs, the reality is far from rosy.  In a series of new reports, surveys, and discussions, healthcare organizations are making it clear that they are ready for a change in the way they think about EHRs and the implementation of analytics infrastructure.
Complaints about federal efforts on interoperability
Gripes about governmental initiatives are nothing new, but as more and more healthcare providers enter Stage 2 of meaningful use – and as the clock ticks down to 2015 when some quality programs will start levying financial penalties – the way CMS and the ONC are handling their end of the bargain has got some stakeholders all riled up.
The American Medical Association (AMA) recently expressed concern that significant changes in leadership atop the ONC might derail the National Coordinator’s efforts to shepherd the healthcare system towards a greater sense of interoperability.  Five high-profile ONC executives have left the office in recent months, and Dr. Karen DeSalvo’s stint as Acting Assistant Secretary of Health will take her mind off the day-to-day workings of her office.
AMA President Robert M. Wah said that the reshuffles are producing “a significant leadership gap which could jeopardize the growing momentum around interoperability,” and continues to urge CMS and the ONC to make meaningful use participation more flexible for providers who are experiencing hardships with technology adoption and the quest to retool their practices to meet the enhanced needs of the program’s latter stages.
Widespread EHR design and user dissatisfaction
From nurses to CIOs, no one seems very happy with the way EHRs are designed and used.  A new Frost & Sullivan report highlights the widespread dissatisfaction with advanced EHR capabilities, including the search and retrieval of unstructured EHR data and significant difficulties maintaining clinical productivity in the face of unwieldy technology.
The report reflects a growing recognition that data analytics is critical for providing the level of care expected by accountable care arrangements, meaningful use requirements, and population health management programs.  “The ability to triangulate EHR data with data from other sources is crucial to ensure access to the right medical information for healthcare providers,” said Frost & Sullivan Connected Health Principal Analyst Nancy Fabozzi. “US regulatory authorities will take notice of the growing chorus of complaints about EHR usability, resulting in a push to devote more resources to solving this issue.”
“Interoperability and usability of the data are important as we continue to push for clear standards including patient matching and data definition,” CHIME President and CEO Russell P. Branzell, FCHIME, CHCIO, said to EHRIntelligence. “Without improved EHR usability, the effectiveness of EHRs will be limited.”
Poor alignment of reporting programs, mandates, and reforms
While the ONC believes that vendor competition will spark a race towards interoperability due to its high demand by customers, providers are being forced to engage in internal competitions of a different sort.  Poor coordination between CMS reporting initiatives, coupled with the need to pull slightly different data for every different quality program, is making it difficult to allocate resources and tackle each of the numerous initiatives.  Eighty-four percent of providers believe that CMS quality reporting programs actually make it harder to deliver quality care.
CMS is attempting to simplify their myriad reporting programs and upgrade the electronic interfaces providers must use to share their data, but 2015 will be a very difficult year for many providers who feel under the gun when it comes to Stage 2, quality reporting, ICD-10, and increasing pressure from payers to move towards accountable care.  Without effective, efficient EHR tools and other health IT lifesavers that can ease the burden of lost hours spent puzzling through reporting documentation, some healthcare organizations may be in for a rocky ride.
A lack of industry-wide data standards
The foundation of interoperability is, of course, a set of industry-wide data standards that encourage sharing between disparate systems and smoothly exchange information across the continuum of care.  While the Continuity of Care Document (CCD) requirement in Stage 2 is a step in the right direction, and technologies like Blue Button and other patient portals for access to personal health information can help providers achieve their care coordination goals in a bit of a roundabout way, the adoption an implementation of standards is a crucial part of long-term success.
The adoption of stronger data standards is a key piece of the ONC’s ten-year plan for the healthcare industry, but even the Government Accountability Office (GAO) doesn’t think that CMS and the ONC have done quite enough to get the industry where it needs to go.
“While the 2014 edition EHR certification standards may lead to a greater ability to exchange information and HHS has tested the implementation of the standards among certain providers, HHS officials told us that the extent to which the standards will lead to widespread improvements in electronic health information exchange will remain unclear until a larger number of providers begin using technology that is certified to the standards,” a March report said.
“Without a sufficient focus on exchange—including specific, prioritized actions with milestones and time frames—CMS and ONC run the risk that the desired outcomes of the EHR programs of improved quality, efficiency, and patient safety will be compromised.”
Without data standards that allow providers to draw on larger pools of clinical data, effective population health management and large-scale clinical analytics that encourage better decision making will be difficult to achieve.  The promise of a data rich healthcare ecosystem bolstered by predictive analytics and a focus on coordinated, patient-centered care cannot be realized until EHRs learn to speak the same language – and providers have the option to purchase systems that are well designed, well executed, and well liked enough to make the investment worthwhile.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsEHR Data AnalyticsEHR InteroperabilityEHR Use


