Providers, Politicians Focus on Population Health Management

December 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Healthcare providers and community leaders work to bring population health management to patients across the nation.
December 17, 2014 - Population health management projects run the gamut from nation-sized efforts to educate citizens about healthy choices down to the back rooms of the tiniest clinics, where care coordinators call individual patients to ensure that their appointments are booked and their prescriptions refilled.  As healthcare providers turn to technology to provide them with data on chronic diseases, public health risks, and patient access to care, communities are successfully addressing population health issues on an effective, local scale.
Detroit stakeholders harness clinical analytics for health improvement
Public and private healthcare organizations in the Detroit area are banding together to leverage the power of clinical analytics for community health.  In an area with high levels of chronic disease, large numbers of underserved patients, and challenges related to the urban environment, the Detroit Wayne County Health Authority is leading a coalition to develop population health improvements.  The initiative will work to reduce negative health indicators such as infant mortality and avoidable readmissions while developing community health needs assessments and a data analytics infrastructure to address the region’s needs.
“It’s clear that we need to do something differently, and that it will take more than one health system and more than one community health initiative to move us effectively in the right direction,” said Chris Allen, CEO of the Detroit Wayne County Health Authority. “The Health Authority is pleased to facilitate this process that will be inclusive of all providers. One of the important objectives of this initiative is bringing together public and private health decision-makers to focus and optimize deployment of community resources.”
Dig Deeper
Three Finalists Named for $100,000 Population Health Prize
Population Health Cuts Native American Kidney Disease by 54%
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Maine task force addresses youth athlete concussions in schools
School boards in Maine are required by law to have concussion management policies for their students, but finding physicians with special expertise in concussions and educating the community on the long-term impact of head injuries has presented certain challenges, reports the Bangor Daily News.
“Schools are trying to figure out how to implement another mandate in their system that they clearly know has an impact on their students, there’s just a learning curve to it,” said Dr. Paul Berkner, director of health services at Colby College in Waterville and president of the Maine Concussion Management Initiative. “We have a solid corps of volunteers across the state who are educating schools, school administrators, physicians, volunteers, parents, coaches and athletes about the risks for concussions, and the schools have really stepped up to the plate.”
School systems and their nurses are working to collect accurate data on youth concussions to report at state levels while using nationally-recognized measurement systems to assess student athletes and protect their health.
Tennessee governor explores Medicaid expansion to increase access to care
Despite the political wrangling around Obamacare, which has the nation sharply divided along party lines, Republican Governor Bill Haslam of Tennessee is looking for ways to expand health insurance coverage to low-income residents in his state.  Proposed changes to the TennCare system could see health insurance coverage spread to more than 200,000 residents who live below the federal poverty line.  These patients are often most at risk for chronic diseases such as diabetes and hypertension, and may not seek primary or preventative care due to the cost of such services.
“We’re trying to put incentives in place for a population that gets free care and that cannot be denied care for any reason,” Haslam said.  The customized insurance waiver system may have further implications for patients already covered under the state’s Medicaid scheme, adds the Times Free Press.
Arkansas clinic enlists medical students for diabetes management and education
The North Street Clinic at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences in Fayetteville will use UAMS students, under faculty supervision, to provide Type 2 diabetes education and management services to patients.  Students will learn the details of population health management as they work in interdisciplinary teams, while patients will benefit from care coordination and other chronic disease management tools.
“Inter-professional education gives students a better appreciation for the roles that each of the health professions play as part of the overall health care team,” said Dr. Bill Buron, regional assistant dean for the UAMS College of Nursing and the clinic’s director, to The City Wire. “Students will learn more about health disparities in their own community, which will make them a more culturally competent health care provider.”
Tagged Patient CarePopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


