Patient Engagement Engine Intends to Boost Population Health

March 25, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 25, 2015 - Partners HealthCare, a Boston-based integrated health system, has received $468,000 in grant money from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to fund the development of a patient engagement engine intended to leverage big data analytics and machine learning promote the use of wearable devices and other fitness trackers that can help control obesity and other long-term health risks.
The grant will aid population health management and chronic disease management by encouraging patients to develop healthier habits and stick with their fitness and wellness routines.
“As an organization that is taking risk on a large proportion of its patients and moving towards value-based reimbursement, better understanding preventative care is extremely important,” said Kamal Jethwani, MD, MPH, Senior Director of Connected Health Innovation at Partners HealthCare, and Principal Investigator on this project. “Our patients are also consumers, and this engagement tool will allow us to interact with them in a new way, helping prevent the onset of chronic disease by enabling them to adopt healthy lifestyles.”
While wearable devices are becoming popular with curious consumers, sustained use of the equipment is lacking.  The Engagement Engine will use analytics to develop insights into typical patient behaviors and provide targeted feedback to those users before researchers at Partners HealthCare validate their algorithms with a study.
Dig Deeper
Adult Vaccine Project Produces Population Health Best Practices
Chronic Care Management Improves Pediatric Outcomes by 20%
AMIA: Consider Broadband Access a Social Determinant of Health
Patients with higher than average body mass indexes will participate in the patient engagement research project with the aim of developing tailored, effective treatment plans for patients who may be at risk for developing metabolic syndrome, Type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and other costly and serious chronic diseases.
“Partners is honored to receive this generous support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, to enhance our knowledge and ability to increase the appropriate use of personal health devices and activity trackers in health consumers,” added Joseph C. Kvedar, MD, Vice President, Connected Health, Partners HealthCare. “Personalization has been a central theme in our work. This grant allows us to significantly expand our capabilities in data analytics geared towards smart segmentation and personalization.”
Devising strategies to increase patient engagement that have a measurable impact on preventative care has been a difficult task for providers and researchers, and the process is fraught with difficulties.  Despite its promises for better health, patient-generated health data is difficult to integrate into EHR workflows, produces significant privacy concerns, and has questionable clinical value.  Some major consumer companies, like Apple, are banking big bucks on the appeal of wearable devices that provide everyday functionalities important to the tech-savvy user while measuring basic health data as an additional feature, but it is too early to tell if the hot market for wearables is just due to their novelty value.
The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and Partners, however, believe that wearable devices could be a key patient engagement technology for providing users with accountability and giving providers a way to gauge the impact of lifestyle choices that occur outside the office setting.
“To build a Culture of Health we will need tools that help people—no matter who they are or where they live—lead healthier lives. Wearable sensors and tracking devices have the potential to help people exercise more, eat healthier and sleep better, and we need to learn more about how people engage with these devices to better understand how they can be maximized,” said Deborah Bae, Senior Program Officer, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. “This project will explore ways to use these tools more effectively to increase and sustain physical activity over time.”
Tagged Patient EngagementPatient Engagement EnginePopulation Health Management


