Evidence Grows for the Effective Patient-Centered Medical Home

January 07, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
How effective is the patient-centered medical home? A series of studies argue that coordinated care is worth the effort.
January 07, 2015 - The patient-centered medical home (PCMH) has become a widely-used frameworks for a healthcare organization’s transition to value-based accountable care.  With its focus on quality, care coordination, preventative services, and chronic disease management, the PCMH highlights the goals of the Triple Aim while integrating health IT into population health management and more personalized individual care.
But how effective are the efforts of payers and providers as they adopt the principles of the PCMH to cut costs and improve care?  There is mounting evidence showing that the industry may be on the right track with the model’s mix of data analytics, population management, EHR adoption, and pro-active transformation.
One of the primary features of the patient-centered medical home is the development of a patient care team that works together to provide coordinated services for each patient as he or she moves along the care continuum.  The primary care provider (PCP) acts as a centralized hub for the patient, managing his or her need for specialty consults, synthesizing data that comes back from these specialists, and working with the patient’s hospital setting to maintain awareness of emergency events, admissions, and discharges.
But this role may be vastly different than what the PCP is used to providing for their patient population, and the transformation is not always an easy one.  While EHR adopters are more likely to achieve higher levels of care quality under the PCMH model than non-adopters, the switch requires much more than an investment in basic health IT.  The bigger investment is time, and that is a scarce commodity for most organizations.
A study published last month in the American Journal of Managed Care challenges the perception that PCMH adoption is simply too time-intensive to be feasible for a busy clinic.  After identifying a pool of patients that could benefit from greater patient engagement and care coordination, a research team from New York University designed a personalized care program that included several 40 to 60 minute visits, split between a registered nurse and a care coordinator with physician oversight.
READ MORE: CIOs Focus on EHR Optimization for Population Health, Analytics
While the length of the consult might immediately scare away providers with over-booked calendars, the results from the extended visits were significant.  Through improved chronic disease management and preventative care, patients achieved an average increased life expectancy of 12 months compared to just 6.7 months under a traditional model.  Patients also experienced gains in smoking cessation, weight control, and hypertension reduction.  By spreading each patient’s time across several members of the care team, providers experienced no serious disruptions in workflow.  The reduction in long-term costs due to patient health gains more than made up for any productivity losses incurred by the length of the consults, the study adds.
The gains in patient health and outcomes also apply to pediatric patients, finds another examination of the PCMH’s effectiveness.  Published in JAMA, a study by researchers at the University of Texas, Harvard Medical School, and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston found that comprehensive patient-centered care reduced the rate of serious illness in children with chronic diseases by more than half while saving over $10,000 in costs per child.  The study also found that providers experienced little added cost after providing more comprehensive care to these vulnerable patients while significantly reducing emergency room visits, hospitalizations, pediatric ICU admissions, and inpatient days.
Proof that patient navigators and care coordinators eventually pay for themselves is also coming to light as the patient-centered medical home takes root in more and more organizations.  At La Rabida Children’s Hospital in Chicago, the implementation of a care coordination program has produced a 145% increase in primary care follow-up visits and a 10.3% decrease in seven-day readmissions.
“Our team has reduced cancellations by 30 percent,” said Brenda Wolf, president and CEO of La Rabida.  “These results just prove that our partnership with Medical Home Network is benefitting our members and increasing the efficiencies and cost-effectiveness of health care in Chicago.”
“I receive the alerts from the emergency departments over the portal advising me that a La Rabida patient is in the ER,” adds care coordinator Melanie Maeda.  “I forward the alerts to each patient’s doctor so they are immediately aware of it.  This is very helpful because in the past, doctors may not find out if one of their patients had been to the ER for several weeks or even months after the visit.”
READ MORE: National Health IT Week Brings Celebration, Educational Events
This relatively small step towards care coordination can prevent at-risk patients from falling through the cracks of the care continuum and ensure that they don’t end up back at the hospital within days or weeks: a key metric of care quality for inpatient facilities.  Better communication across care settings is at the heart of the patient-centered medical home model, and can make a big difference to revenue and patient outcomes for those benefiting from the personalized, highly organized healthcare services of a PCMH provider.
Tagged Accountable CarePatient CarePopulation Health Management


