HHS Doles Out $87M to Promote Health IT, Analytics Adoption

September 16, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 16, 2016 - More than 1300 health centers across the nation will share in $87 million of HHS funding to support the continued adoption of health IT tools, including health information exchange capabilities and big data analytics solutions, as well as certified upgrades to electronic health record infrastructure.
The funding, aimed at supporting healthcare providers that deliver primary care services to more than 24 million vulnerable patients, will help to improve the health system’s ability to engage in population health management and prepare for the transition to value-based reimbursement models.
These organizations serve close to 1 in 14 US patients, including ten percent of children and more than a million homeless patients.
“Health centers across the country are instrumental in providing high-quality, comprehensive primary health care to millions of people,” said HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell. “This investment will help unlock health care data and put it to work, improving health outcomes and building a better health care system for the American people.”
Dig Deeper
HHS Targets Population Health, Big Data with $36M in Grants
Epic Systems, Cerner Remain Leading Population Health Companies
A Mere 3% of LTPAC Orgs Have Healthcare Data Analytics Tools
The awards will come out of the Community Health Center Fund, established by the Affordable Care Act and replenished by the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA) in 2015. 
Organizations that plan to use the funding to invest in EHR system upgrades must purchase certified EHR technology, the announcement stressed, in order to ensure that health centers are equipped with the health IT infrastructure required to attest to the latter stages of meaningful use and the upcoming MACRA program.
“These awards will allow health centers to deliver higher quality of care to patients and spend health care dollars in a smarter way,” said Jim Macrae, Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) Acting Administrator.  HRSA, a division of HHS, oversees the Health Center Program and its funding.
California will receive the most grant money from the opportunity, totaling more than $12 million to support 168 health centers across the state, including organizations that focus on caring for pediatric patients, Native American and Hispanic communities, AIDS patients, and residents with mental and behavioral health needs.
New York health centers will share more than $5 million for health IT investments, and Texas providers will split $4.8 million to bolster their analytics, population health management, and EHR competencies.  Florida health centers will divvy up $4 million, and Illinois providers will use $3.5 million for health IT improvements.
Other states, including Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Washington, Georgia, and North Carolina, all received more than $2 million each.
Health centers in the US territories and freely associated states, including Puerto Rico, the US Virgin Islands, Northern Mariana Island, Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the Marshall Islands, Palau, and American Samoa will also share in several million dollars to work on their health IT development.
The latest award follows a $36 million grant to the fifty Health Center Controlled Networks (HCCNs) that oversee collaboration, communication, and education for the nearly 1400 health centers scattered across the country.  Similar to their member organizations, the HCCNs will use the grants to focus on boosting their population health management, analytics, and health information exchange skills.
“Health Center Controlled Networks are a key tool in providing quality primary care to medically underserved communities,” Burwell said in July. “By using these networks, individual health centers can work together to share resources, leverage buying power, and improve access to health information technology, leading to a better care experience for vulnerable populations.”
Earlier this summer, HHS also announced a $100 million reward for health centers that scored highly on quality reporting requirements and demonstrated progress with coordinating care, preparing for value-based reimbursement, and utilizing data to improve service delivery.
“Health centers are evaluated on a set of performance measures emphasizing health outcomes and the value of care delivered,” said Macrae. “These measures provide a balanced, comprehensive look at services to manage conditions among the vulnerable populations served by health centers.”
In both rounds of funding, the vast majority of health centers received at least some portion of the grant money to continue the process of leveraging health IT infrastructure to improve quality.
How to Get Started with a Population Health Management Program
Identifying Care Disparities for Population Health Management
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR AdoptionPopulation Health ManagementSafety Net Patients


