Predictive Analytics Identify High Risk Hepatitis C Patients

May 26, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 26, 2015 - Researchers from the University of Michigan have developed a predictive analytics algorithm that uses basic EHR data to flag patients at high risk of developing complications from the hepatitis C virus (HCV), according to a study published in the most recent issue of Hepatology.  As payers seek to control the costs of extremely expensive but highly effective new HCV treatments like Sovaldi, the use of clinical analytics to pinpoint the most meaningful course of treatment for patients may help to avoid unnecessary spending.
More than three million Americans are living with HCV, the Office of the National Coordinator said recently, and the virus presents a major challenge when it comes to reducing the costs of chronic disease management.  Patients with the liver-damaging virus incur five times the average annual healthcare costs, yet only half of patient suspected of having the liver-damaging virus have been diagnosed with the condition.  Just one tenth of those patients ever receive treatment, and only half of those are ever cured.
Approximately one-third of HCV patients are at high risk of developing complications from the virus, says the research team, but providers aren’t always aware of who those patients may be.  “Offering immediate treatment to patients identified as high risk for poor health outcomes would allow these patients to benefit from highly effective treatments as other patients continue to be monitored and their risk assessment updated at each clinic visit,” says lead study author Monica Konerman, MD, MSc, a fellow in gastroenterology at the University of Michigan Health System.
“Ideally we would treat all patients,” she added. “Until logistic and financial barriers are solved, clinicians and policy makers are faced with trying to target these therapies to patients with the most urgent need.  The model allows us to identify these patients with greater accuracy.”
Dig Deeper
Penn Med. Population Health Analytics Dashboard Wins ECRI Prize
Predictive Big Data Analytics Identify High-Risk ED Patients
Population Health is Top Data Analytics Challenge for Providers, Payers
The predictive analytics model was developed using a dataset derived from the Hepatitis C Antiviral Long-term Treatment Against Cirrhosis (HALT-C) trial conducted by the National Institutes of Health.  The team used machine learning techniques to process clinical information such as lab results, age, body mass index, and details of the virus type to create a risk score for patients.  The score is more accurate than previous attempts because the algorithm uses more lab values than other models and analyzes how the values change over time.
The tool can be integrated into electronic health records to help providers deliver more aggressive treatment to patients who would see the most benefit.  It can also help healthcare organizations develop a chronic disease management plan by identifying ideal intervals for primary care visits and follow-up. 
This is especially important for HCV patients, who often fall away from the continuum of care.  Even patients who are among the lucky few to receive curative treatments like Sovaldi are highly likely to discontinue the course of medication before finishing it, a CVS Health study found in 2014.  While the drug has a 95 percent rate of effectiveness, one in twelve patients will stop taking the drug before it has a chance to work, rendering the $1000-per-day investment meaningless.
“While Sovaldi represents a breakthrough in the treatment of Hepatitis C, this is an expensive drug that needs to be taken as directed for the full course of treatment in order to achieve the maximum clinical benefit demonstrated in the trials,” says Troyen A. Brennan, MD, Chief Medical Officer of CVS Health. “Our data suggest that in order to help patients achieve their treatment goals, we need to ensure that those patients who are prescribed Sovaldi are adherent to their full course of therapy.”
By incorporating predictive analytics and care coordination aids that help providers ensure higher levels of chronic disease management and medication adherence for patients, the healthcare system may be able to reduce waste and offer more treatment options to those who have a higher chance of developing life-threatening complications.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health ManagementPredictive Analytics


