In-Hospital Prescriptions Boost Medication Adherence by 29%

July 26, 2016

By Sara Heath
July 26, 2016 - Making medications available at the point of care can improve medication adherence rates by up to 29 percent, according to recent research published in the American Journal of Managed Care.
The study involved an analysis of diabetic Medicare patients in an at-risk hospital serving a predominantly minority population. By examining medication adherence rates for three types of diabetes medications – oral antidiabetic agents, cholesterol medications, and blood pressure medications – the researchers were able to determine the efficacy of physician-led point of care medication delivery systems (POCMDS).
Overall, the researchers found adherence improvements for all three medication classes, ranging from 17 to 29 percentage points. Adherence rates for oral antidiabetic agents rose by 17 percent, cholesterol medications by 29 percent, and blood pressure medications by 21 percent.
Further, 80 percent of the study participants reported that POCMDS was more convenient because they were able to receive their medications during their appointments, rather than having to visit a pharmacy.
This was one of the reasons why the POCMDS worked to boost medication adherence, the researchers stated. The method reduced the main barriers to improving medication adherence, including access to medication and communication between the prescribing physician and the patient. POCMDS also worked to reduce adherence barriers because of its reliance on generic drugs, helping to mitigate cost issues.
READ MORE: Diabetes Medication Adherence Cuts Costs by 4%, Boosts Outcomes
The researchers also touted the efficiency of the POCMDS model. First, because providers cut out the middle man of the pharmacy, they were able to spend their time discussing the medication with their patients. This included explaining how to take the medication and the importance of doing so..
Second, this method proved sustainable, both for its low-cost of implementation within the practice, as well as its reliance on generic medications. Because POCMDS did not cost much for healthcare organizations, it was easy for them to maintain its practice.
Lastly, POCMDS enabled better accountability. Providers were better able to keep an eye on whether or not their patients took their medications and were in a better position to intervene if a patient was having trouble.
According to the research team, one of the primary benefits of boosting patient medication adherence levels is improved clinical outcomes, which, in a capitated hospital like those included in the study, are critical for Medicare payments.
However, the researchers did not find significant improvement in participants’ health. This was likely because many of the study participants already had ideal LDL-C, A1C, and blood pressure levels.
READ MORE: Cost is a Primary Driver of Medication Non-Adherence Rates
These results may also have been due to other hospital programs operating during the time of the study which influenced the outcomes of patient glycemic and blood pressure control. They also may have been influenced by the kind of generic medications on the market at the time of the study.
Overall, however, this study shows the feasibility of an overarching medication adherence strategy. Because it is both financially sustainable and accepted by patients, the researchers said it is a promising strategy for improving medication adherence.
The researchers report an optimistic outlook on POCMDS going forward, saying that while more expansive research is necessary before widespread strategy deployment, it does show promise.
“The implementation of the POCMDS led to large improvements in medication adherence. The intervention had high levels of acceptability and did not result in greater pharmacy costs to the capitated health system,” the researchers concluded. “Future studies with larger samples should evaluate the impact of the POCMDS on clinical outcomes among diverse populations, as well as its impact on healthcare utilization and overall costs.”
Similar solutions, especially for diabetic patients, are critical considering the number of diabetic patients with low medication adherence rates. Recent data from IMS Health shows that nearly half of diabetic patients have low medication adherence, resulting in lower health levels.
READ MORE: Big Data Could Hold Key to Improving Vaccinations Rates
Overall, non-adherent patients cost the industry $4 billion annually due to health complications.
IMS Health leaders say that health interventions, like the POCMDS model, are key in improving medication adherence rates.
“Simple, customized interventions that put patients on the path to optimal adherence and persistence can yield tangible results, but require alignment between healthcare and government leaders, as well as the active involvement of voluntary associations and the private sector,” said Murray Aitken, IMS Health senior vice president and executive director of the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics.
Going forward, healthcare professionals must continue to examine medication adherence strategies, testing their feasibility not only on certain subpopulations, but on all patients as a whole.
Dig Deeper:
Open EHR Notes Improve Medication Adherence, Engagement
Partnership Ups Medication Adherence with Predictive Analytics
Tagged Medication Non AdherencePatient Engagement StrategiesPopulation Health Management


