AHIMA: Learning health system combines informatics, innovation

June 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 17, 2014 - At the intersection of health information management, clinical analytics, and innovations in care delivery lies the learning health system (LHS), says AHIMA in a new journal article by Joshua C. Rubin, JD, MBA, MPH, MPP, and Charles P. Friedman, PhD, and the society heartily endorses the continued development of patient-centered, data-driven care.
“The LHS can be seen as the tapestry that emerges from weaving together efforts across the health information management, health IT, patient engagement, clinical care, research, and public health arenas aimed at utilizing data, information, and knowledge to improve health,” write Rubin and Friedman.  “The LHS will, as a single infrastructure producing cycles of learning and continuous improvement on many scales, serve the learning needs of all stakeholders—empowering them to take actions informed by this timely-generated knowledge, and bringing about transformative change.”
AHIMA has joined nearly sixty other healthcare organizations to promote and disseminate the values of the LHS, including HIMSS, Geisinger Health System, Siemens, WellPoint, and the American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA).  The LHS could help to mitigate some of the most pervasive problems in healthcare delivery, including inaccurate, outdated, silos of data that lead to poor patient care decisions wasteful and inefficient organizational operations.
“AHIMA recognizes that needs are evolving from simply translating health data to providing instant access to health intelligence that not only drives clinical and administrative decision-making in real time, but arms physicians and their patients with trustworthy information they need to make health decisions,” said AHIMA CEO Lynne Thomas Gordon, MBA, RHIA, CAE, FACHE, FAHIMA in a public statement. “The core values of a learning health system, including access to secure, accurate health information are in line with AHIMA’s long-standing commitment to quality healthcare through quality information.”
Dig Deeper
Illinois to Use Blockchain for Healthcare Credential Management
Mismatched Symptoms Call EHR Data Integrity into Question
Provider Data Management Offers Payers a Blockchain Use Case
The learning health system is person-focused, adaptable, cooperative, and inclusive, the article states, while focusing on governance, patient privacy, and transparency for all stakeholders.  The Learning Health Community, a grassroots movement led in part by Rubin and Friedman, has grown out of a 2012 LHS Summit sponsored by the Joseph H. Kanter Family Foundation, which brought together industry leaders to collaborate and brainstorm.
“If the lifeblood of the LHS is shared real world health data and the information and knowledge derived from it, the spirit of the LHS and the Learning Health Community is working together to give the gift of health to our children and our nation,” the article concludes. “By its grassroots nature, the community is a self-organizing coalition of the willing, whose work is driven by efforts of the participants that grow in the community’s fertile environment conducive to the multi-stakeholder collaboration essential to realizing the LHS as a movement. Like any grassroots endeavor, the Learning Health Community and the initiatives it spawns will become what the members of this community make it into.”
Tagged Clinical DataHealth Information ManagementHealthcare Data Management


