CMS Unveils Value-Based Patient-Centered Primary Care Model

April 12, 2016

By Sara Heath
April 12, 2016 - The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) has unveiled the Comprehensive Primary Care Plus (CPC+) model, a new multi-payer patient-centered primary care model which aims to allow providers to deliver flexible, individualized care to their patients.
“Strengthening primary care is critical to an effective health care system,” said Dr. Patrick Conway, CMS deputy administrator and chief medical officer.
“By supporting primary care doctors and clinicians to spend time with patients, serve patients’ needs outside of the office visit, and better coordinate care with specialists we can continue to build a health care system that results in healthier people and smarter spending of our healthcare dollars.”
“The Comprehensive Primary Care Plus model represents the future of health care that we’re striving towards.”
The CPC+ model focuses on five strategies to implement population health management and chronic disease management techniques that foster coordinated, patient-centered care.  
READ MORE: NCQA Revamps Patient-Centered Medical Home to Ease Adoption
The framework will support patients with complex needs to help achieve their goals, expand access to care and personal health information, focus on the delivery of preventative care, engage patients and their caregivers, and develop strategies to improve care coordination across the healthcare continuum.
Ultimately, this higher level of care will help primary care practices transition to value-based payment models by introducing them to risk-based payments in a slow and incremental manner.
Primary care practices will participate in one of two financial tracks. While both tracks require primary care practices to meet the criteria listed above and utilize value-based reimbursement models, track two relies more heavily on a value-based payment model.
Track one practices will receive monthly care management fees and fee-for-service payments under the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule. In track two, practices will also receive monthly care management fees, but will receive reduced fee-for-service payments in addition to comprehensive, value-based care payments.
In order to promote outcomes-based care, participants in both track one and track two will receive up-front incentive payments that they will either keep or pay back to CMS depending upon the practices’ performances on quality measurements.
READ MORE: CMS Expands Comprehensive Primary Care Plus to New Regions
CPC+ also supports robust use of health IT in order to make the necessary changes to clinical workflow, specifically care coordination. In order to better support these technology initiatives, CMS will sign a Memorandum of Understanding with participating health IT vendors that states the vendors fully support the practice’s value-based care goals.
“These partnerships will be vital to practices’ success in the care delivery work and align with the ONC’s priority to ensure electronic health information is available when and where it matters to consumers and clinicians,” CMS explains.
This program will also depend upon private healthcare payers. CMS will partner with private and state-led health insurance plans in order to support primary care practices in delivering advanced primary care.
According to CMS, advanced primary care encompasses the following five attributes:
Services are accessible, responsive to an individual’s preference, and patients can take advantage of enhanced in-person hours and 24/7 telephone or electronic access.
READ MORE: Developing Community Partners for Population Health ManagementPatients at highest risk receive proactive, relationship-based care management services to improve outcomes.
Care is comprehensive and practices can meet the majority of each individual’s physical and mental health care needs, including prevention. Care is also coordinated across the health care system, including specialty care and community services, and patients receive timely follow-up after emergency room or hospital visits.
It is patient-centered, recognizing that patients and family members are core members of the care team, and actively engages patients to design care that best meets their needs.
Quality and utilization of services are measured, and data is analyzed to identify opportunities for improvements in care and to develop new capabilities.
CPC+ will encompass 20 regions nationwide and will include 5,000 practices. This will involve some 20,000 providers and the 25 million patients they serve.
Prospective healthcare payers may submit proposals to CMS between April 15 and June 1. Prospective practices may submit applications to CMS between June 15 and September 1. The agency will select practices based off of the number of payers showing interested in CPC+ in each of the 20 regions.
CPC+ has received praise from industry leaders such as the Patient-Centered Primary Care Collaborative (PCPCC). The organization states that CPC+ is the future of the healthcare industry through its help in shifting primary care practices to value-based models.
“The CPC+ initiative represents the future of health care,” PCPCC explained. “It encourages the type of comprehensive primary care that not only leads to more effective, efficient, and patient-centered care but also embraces value.”
“It moves us a significant step forward in providing the necessary payment structures to enable primary care providers to operate as high functioning patient-centered medical homes – with clinicians and care teams that offer trusted healing relationships with patients and their families.”
Tagged CMSPatient Centered Medical HomePrimary Care Services


