Healthcare Data Analytics Company Receives Major Investment

March 06, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 06, 2015 - Definitive Healthcare, a provider of healthcare data analytics and business intelligence information, has received a significant investment from growth equity firm Spectrum Equity, the company announced this week.  The investment will further Definitive Healthcare’s work into providing the industry with comprehensive, up-to-date, integrated data on physicians, hospitals, and healthcare providers.
“The volume of healthcare data has been and will continue to explode,” said Definitive CEO Jason Krantz.   “The ability to draw actionable insight from the information for sales and marketing strategy, quality/cost improvements, and expansion of provider networks will separate winners from losers in markets ranging from healthcare providers themselves to pharmaceutical companies, technology vendors and healthcare consultants.”
“Definitive has developed the most integrated set of proprietary and third party data that provides our clients with this insight,” Krantz added.   “Our integrated information gives a full view of all the healthcare providers and how they are connected.”
Details of the transaction have not been disclosed.  However, in conjunction with the investment, Jeff Haywood, a Principal of Spectrum Equity, and Chris Mitchell, a Managing Director of Spectrum Equity will join Definitive’s Board of Directors.
Dig Deeper
Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
Financial Big Data Analytics Woes Plague Healthcare Providers, Payers
HIM Pros Must Shift from Coding to Health Informatics, Analytics
“Definitive’s online subscription-based product suite combines proprietary data and sophisticated analytics to provide its customers with valuable insights into key patient trends, detailed provider and network affiliations, executive and IT-level contact information and other in-depth news and intelligence on healthcare providers,” said Haywood. “As the company’s financial partner, we are focused on helping Jason and his team execute on their growth plan and are excited to include Definitive Healthcare among Spectrum’s portfolio of healthcare-related investments.”
  Tagged Financial AnalyticsHealthcare Analytics


