VA, CMS Announce Data Sharing, Fraud Prevention Partnership

January 24, 2018

By Jessica Kent
January 24, 2018 - The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and CMS have announced a partnership to share data assets, data analytics tools, and best practices for preventing fraud, waste and abuse.
“The VA-HHS alliance represents the latest example of VA’s commitment to find partners to assist with identifying new and innovative ways to seek out fraud, waste and abuse and ensure every tax dollar given to VA supports Veterans,” said VA Secretary Dr. David J. Shulkin.
The partnership will contribute to ongoing efforts to help the country’s veterans by leveraging improvements in reducing fraud, waste and abuse in Medicare.
Dig Deeper
DOJ Leverages Big Data Analytics to Combat Opioid Fraud, Abuse
Understanding the Growth, Value of Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
In 2010, CMS established the Center for Program Integrity, which saved Medicare operations an estimated $17 billion in fiscal 2015.
The VA plans to capitalize on CMS’s analytics developments and to focus on CMS’s use of advanced technology, statistics, and data analytics to enhance fraud detection and prevention.
The VA will make continuous efforts to improve their fraud detection skills. In April 2018, VA plans to invite industry experts to demonstrate their skills in fraud detection, waste and abuse prevention, and improper payment recovery.
The VA anticipates being able to close existing gaps in its own claims payment process by building on CMS’s successful program integrity protocols.  
“We have a special obligation to keep America’s promise to those who have served our country and ensure that Veterans receive high-quality and accessible health care,” said CMS Administrator Seema Verma.
“CMS is sharing lessons learned and expertise to support VA to identify waste and fraud and eliminate these abuses of the public trust. Using state-of-the-art data analytics, CMS is partnering with VA to better detect and prevent wrongdoing in its programs.”
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsCMSMedicare Fraud


