Clinical Decision Support App May Cut CTs for Head Injuries

May 24, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 24, 2017 - A clinical decision support (CDS) application that includes patient education and risk stratification may be able to reduce the delivery – and costs – of unnecessary CT scans for minor head injuries, says a new study in the Journal of Medical Internet Research.
The Concussion or Brain Bleed app, developed at Yale and the Mayo Clinic, integrates bedside clinical decision support and a patient-centered educational component that helps providers and patients collaborate on decisions in the emergency department. 
The app relies on a widely accepted clinical guideline known as the Canadian CT Head Rule, which is highly accurate at predicting the severity of injuries and the patient’s potential outcomes. 
Using simple and accessible visualizations, the tool engages patients by asking their top concerns after a head injury, evaluating the severity of the injury, and delivering targeted information to users that recommends a course of action.
Patients using the app can review a number of resources explaining the recommendation for or against a CT scan and discuss the results with their providers.  They can also access information on what to expect after discharge from ED and when to call a physician if symptoms worsen or do not improve.
Source: JMIR
READ MORE: Patient Engagement Must Be Top Priority for Quality Healthcare
The application fills a gap in the point-of-care clinical decision support landscape, its creators assert.  While the Canadian CT Head Rule should theoretically reduce unnecessary CT imaging by up to a third, the guideline has thus far failed to produce the intended effect.
Existing CDS efforts rooted in the electronic health record (EHR) have also fallen short of expectations due to a variety of factors, including poor programming, overwhelming alerts, and unanticipated errors. 
EHR users often find that working on a laptop or desktop makes it difficult to conduct natural and meaningful conversations with patients, says lead author Edward R. Melnick, MHS, MD, of the Department of Emergency Medicine at the Yale School of Medicine.
In addition, EHR-based clinical decision support tools rarely include a patient-facing component, which can leave patients feeling confused, ignored, or anxious about a provider’s decision.
In order to develop a more “empathic” approach to care than EHRs typically provide, collaborative decision-making and patient education must take pride of place, he and his colleagues argue.
READ MORE: VA Clinical Decision Support Cuts Unnecessary Lab Tests by 11%
“The fight to stem medical overuse will require the use of disruptive technologies—often innovative but simple, high-value solutions that can be widely adopted and easily used,” the study said.
“This tool combines evidence-based practices with patient engagement that establishes trust, empowers active participation, and addresses patient concerns and uncertainty about their condition at the point of care.  It helps clinicians to determine who needs a CT and then helps patients to understand why.”
The team employed user-centered design protocols to engage end-users with an intuitive, attractive, and easily navigable application intended for use on a tablet computer.  Tablets mimic the form of familiar paper-based assessments, but allow patients to interact in a meaningful way with the information presented to them.
“In developing a digital tool, we also have the additional benefit of having a database to collect, edit, store, and retrieve data generated by the tool and further reduce workflow burden through direct integration with EHR systems,” the researchers added.
Source: JMIR
Sixteen versions of the application, each informed by patient feedback and field testing, resulted in a streamlined and accessible application that did not overload users with large amounts of text or overly-technical jargon.
READ MORE: Patient Safety, Engagement Relies on Crafting a Culture of Change
“Involving end-users and a variety of clinicians in both simulated and real-world clinical environments in an iterative process ensures that the format and information content of our tool is responsive to user preferences and the complexities of decision context,” Melnick wrote.
Source: JMIR
The team focused on educating patients about what a CT scan could show – evidence of concussion does not appear during the test – and including plain language to explain the severity of their injuries.  The goal was to develop patient trust that the chosen course of action would adequately address their concerns and help them recover.
“Patient involvement begins with the development of a partnership and includes participation in information exchange, deliberation, and decision making,” said the study. “The app equips clinicians to foster trust and manage patient expectations in a fast-paced ED environment characterized by uncertainty and high emotions.”
After positive feedback from patients and clinicians, the team expects that the app will accelerate a reduction in unnecessary CT scans, lowering spending and reducing the time it takes to care for patients in the ED.
“Concussion or Brain Bleed could improve both the quantity and quality of time at the beside,” the study concludes. “Visualizing benefits and harms can lead to increased patient knowledge and involvement in decision making, greater satisfaction with the decision-making process, and optimal health outcomes consistent with patient values and preferences.” 
Tagged Clinical Decision SupportEHR UseHealthcare SpendingHospital QualityPatient Engagement AppsPatient SatisfactionPopulation Health Management


