Can mHealth mature into a useful tool for preventive care?

October 30, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 30, 2013 - Healthcare providers are searching for all the help they can get to dodge financial penalties for preventable readmissions, insufficient quality of care, and a lack of patient engagement, and oftentimes, they don’t need to look further than their very own smartphones.  Mobile health (mHealth) applications that educate, track, and communicate are becoming an increasingly powerful weapon in the fight to keep patients healthy and hospital-free, but with the overwhelming number of choices available to consumers, and the limited functionality of many applications, clinicians and patients alike find it hard to discover an app worth using.  How can providers leverage the positive aspects of mHealth without getting lost in the jungle of bad software that produces junk data?
In a recent report, IMS Health found that in the Apple iTunes store alone, there are more than 16,000 apps targeted to healthcare consumers and nearly 7500 focused on healthcare providers.  Of these apps, the majority do little more than provide information, which could come from any number of erroneous sources.  Five thousand will actually record data, such as weight and calories, blood sugar, or blood pressure.  But only 159 actually link to biometric sensor devices, and fewer than 50 of those aid actual condition management.
Additionally, there are relatively few apps focused on the leading causes of hospital readmissions and patient deaths: only 77 apps target cancer, and of the 139 apps addressing heart and circulatory conditions, only 11 put a spotlight on strokes.  The majority of apps intended to attract a certain demographic are aimed towards women’s and children’s health, with pregnancy and fertility making up a large portion of the software available.
Dig Deeper
SC Online Population Health Dashboard Reveals Community Disparities
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
For providers looking to use mHealth to reduce readmissions and boost adherence and preventive care, this presents a problem.  Healthy young women trying to have children are not anywhere near the most costly or high-risk patient bracket. Seniors with complex conditions, who account for most of healthcare spending, are increasing their smartphone use, and can benefit from applications for medication management and care coordination, but mHealth penetration among the over-65 crowd is still low, hovering around one-fifth of patients.
Elderly patients are often asked to juggle numerous prescriptions and treatments while coping with decreased mobility and forgetfulness.  Adding apps to the list could simply result in data overload, decreasing engagement instead of boosting it.  “There’s a group [of patients] who each have several medical problems and often they have several specialists, all making recommendations. It’s often overwhelming for the patient and for the caregiver,” says Leslie Kernisan, a geriatrician and caregiver educator.  “They get overwhelmed by the number of pills and the number of recommendations that they have been given, so I feel that if everybody starts prescribing apps, it could quickly lead to app overload.”
Providers and patients are both strongly interested in using mobile health to simplify care and stay healthy, but the challenges are still many.  A dizzying array of choices with little standardization and medical endorsement makes it difficult for physicians to recommend useful mHealth, and a lack of integration with EHRs, clinical decision support tools, and wider population health management programs makes the value questionable for busy clinicians.  As mHealth matures, there is hope that these connections will grow and mHealth will become an integral part of the patient care cycle.  But as it stands, mHealth remains more of a novelty than an essential tool.
“For healthcare apps to move through a maturity cycle from being an ad hoc recommendation to a systematic, integrated component of healthcare delivery, all stakeholders will need to work together,” the report concludes. “Healthcare payers and providers will increasingly recognize the potential benefit apps can bring, and a concerted effort will be made to evaluate healthcare apps and to integrate them with other health IT offerings.”
  Tagged Global mHealthHealthcare Data StrategyHospital ReadmissionsPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


