What does the Stage 2 Meaningful Use delay mean for analytics?

December 10, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 10, 2013 - After sneaking its way into the news late last week, the HealthITBuzz blog post by Acting National Coordinator Jacob Reider and Robert Tagalicod, Director of the Office of e-Health Standards and Services at CMS stating that Stage 2 will be extended through 2016 and Stage 3 through 2017 has caused quite a stir as many industry stakeholders breathe a sigh of relief and others complain that the delay doesn’t go far enough.  Hospitals and eligible professionals will have a little more time to get their act together, but what does it mean for the future of data analytics, health information exchange, and population management?  Here are a couple of predictions about the next few years of the EHR Incentive Programs.
More time means more data
Reider and Tagalicod note that one of the major reasons behind the delay is to give CMS and the ONC a chance to collect more information on the industry’s progress and trouble spots.  “This new proposed timeline tracks ongoing conversations we at CMS and ONC have had with providers, consumers, health care associations, EHR developers, and other stakeholders in the health care industry,” they write.  Moving more slowly will allow rule makers to use data from the actual impact of Stage 2 in order to inform the next phase, which is something that didn’t have time to happen as we take the first step up in 2014.
As EHR products and analytics infrastructures in hospitals and physician offices mature over the next few years, providing detailed reports, CMS and ONC will have a lot more to work with as they figure out what is effective and what is unnecessarily burdening providers participating in the incentive programs.
HIE will have a chance to mature before Stage 3
READ MORE: How FHIR Offers a New Approach to Working with Healthcare Data
“The phased approach to program participation helps providers move from creating information in Stage 1, to exchanging health information in Stage 2, to focusing on improved outcomes in Stage 3,” the blog post explains, in order to “support an aggressive yet smart transition for providers.”  By extending the Stage 2 period, providers will have extra breathing room in order to develop their health information exchange capabilities before moving on to using the data to improve outcomes.
Research has shown that communication between providers, and between providers and their patients, is one of the biggest determining factors in reducing preventable readmissions and maintaining good health.  As organizations integrate advanced analytics to flag instances where communication is necessary and adopt population health management programs that encourage proactive contact with patients and other providers, the industry will be better prepared for focusing on outcomes in Stage 3 and beyond.
Patient-generated data will be a no-brainer
mHealth isn’t going away any time soon, and providers will need to figure out a way to integrate patient-provided data into the EHR workflow if they are to have a chance of truly understanding and synthesizing all available information for a patient.  With industry groups already petitioning CMS to include patient-generated data as a core piece of Stage 3, it seems likely that the rule makers will pay attention by the time 2015 comes around.  After all, mHealth is growing insanely quickly and patient engagement is the name of the game in Stage 2.
2015 will bring analytics into EHRs, but providers might not buy it
READ MORE: How Data-Driven Care Management Improves Population Health in NC
The 2014 EHR certification criteria require most providers to make some sort of upgrade to ONC-approved technology.  It’s expensive, time consuming, and no one is quite sure how many organizations are going to be able to complete the process before the deadline.  The ONC plans to update the certification criteria for 2015, but will make adoption optional for providers.
“Providers participating in the EHR Incentive Programs would NOT have to upgrade to 2015 Edition EHR technology and NO EHR technology developer who has certified its EHR technology to the 2014 Edition would need to recertify its products. Our intention would be for the 2014 Edition to remain the baseline certification criteria edition for meeting the Certified EHR Technology definition,” the blog post says.
While this is great for organizations already feeling a financial squeeze from their initial EHR implementation or subsequent replacement, it’s not so great for analytics.  Vendors are starting to add robust analytics packages into their EHR products, and will no doubt continue to do so through 2015.  But if providers don’t have to upgrade, chances are they won’t.  How these voluntary criteria will affect the progress of integrated analytics remains to be seen.
ICD-10 will still be a backbreaker
One thing that isn’t changing is the Stage 2 start date.  It will still hit right smack in the middle of ICD-10 implementation and will still cause headaches for providers who have too many things on their plates.  CHIME and HIMSS have already voiced their displeasure over what they see as a half-baked measure that will serious jeopardize a successful ICD-10 transition.
READ MORE: Data Exchange, Analytics Remain Out of Reach for Many Providers
“Without flexibility, we foresee increased risk to numerous concurrent programs, especially to ICD-10,” wrote CHIME Board Chair George T. Hickman in an open letter to HHS. “With ICD-10 compliance, the HIPAA Omnibus Rule requirements, and payment reform under the Affordable Care Act and Meaningful Use all converging in 2014, providers are nearing a breaking point. Due to these concurrent mandates and resource constraints, numerous providers have already indicated they will not pursue Meaningful Use Stage 2 in 2014.”
CMS has said again and again that the ICD-10 compliance date is set in stone, and with Stage 2 looming for early adopters in a matter of weeks, it might be too late to make major adjustments to the start date for those who should have had the most time to prepare.  2014 will be a major hurdle for providers no matter what, but if the industry is able to grin and bear it for a while, the Stage 2 and Stage 3 extensions may provide critical breathing room after a tough year.
Tagged EHR AnalyticsHealth Information ExchangeHealthcare AnalyticsICD-10Meaningful UsePatient Engagement


