Big Data Analytics, Value-Based Care Hot Topics for HIMSS16

February 11, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 11, 2016 - As the healthcare industry prepares to gather in sunny Las Vegas for the HIMSS16, they will be bringing plenty of questions, opinions, and experiences about some of the most pressing topics facing their organizations. 
From big data analytics and value-based reimbursement to population health management and EHR usability strategies, the educational sessions, roundtable discussions, and keynote addresses at the annual conference will undoubtedly leave attendees – and readers at home – something to think about.
In just a few short weeks, HealthITAnalytics.com will be braving the crowded convention center floor to bring you all the latest breaking news, intriguing interviews, and session recaps from the show.  Here are some of our top predictions about what attendees will be talking about this year.
Making healthcare big data analytics actionable for better care
The healthcare system has a lot of data on its hands.  Now is the time to make it actionable.  In order to create a true “learning health system,” providers must start growing their competencies with informatics, healthcare big data collection and management, and clinical decision support.
READ MORE: Value-Based Care Requires Good Big Data, Better Communication
Bright and early Tuesday morning, Thomas Carton, PhD, MS, Director of Health Services Research at the Louisiana Public Health Institute, will discuss how his organization created multi-faceted platform with two million patients, bringing interoperability and connected health strategies to bear on patient engagement.
Ari Robicsek, MD and Chad Konchak, MBA, from NorthShore University Health Center will explain how predictive analytics can integrate with EHR systems to supplement clinical decision making, and Gary Horn from Advocate Health Care will give advice about developing a cloud-based data center ecosystem to ensure business continuity and reliability for end-users.
Representatives from Christiana Care Health System will review their successful “Triple Aim dashboards” project, while CIOs and CMIOs from Cleveland Clinic and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center will participate in a roundtable discussion about the importance of executive collaboration for health IT transformation and organizational change.  
Turning EHR interoperability into population health management
Many providers may still be struggling to optimize their EHRs and connect to other stakeholders for health information exchange, but some pioneering organizations are already leveraging shared information for meaningful population health management.
READ MORE: HCOs Falling Short of Population Health, Value-Based Care Goals
Learn how to take a systematic approach to population health management from the Mayo Clinic on Wednesday, or review strategies for reducing health disparities among minority patients by leveraging health IT tools.
Elizabeth Regan, PhD, from the Eastern Kentucky REC, will explain how to engage in EHR optimization projects that will help to achieve better population health outcomes, and a session led by Joel Vengco from Baystate Health will highlight the benefits of seamless communication in the accountable care environment.
Embracing value-based reimbursement as the new normal
Already working hard on making your data flow freely?  Take the next step and start accepting financial risk for patient outcomes.  Value-based care is the lynchpin of healthcare reform, and a primary strategic goal for CMS and private payers in the next few years.
Roper Saint Francis Health System will share how value metrics intersect with new payment models and how strong data governance can reap rewards down the line.  CMS representatives will take the floor to break down current clinical quality measures and future development targets.
READ MORE: Humana Launches Value-Based Care Model for Expectant Mothers
And if you’re ready to dive into risk-based contracting, you can brush up on the basics with Carrie Nixon and Mark Engelen, who will guide you through the upcoming changes to mandated programs such as PQRS, the EHR Incentive Programs, and MIPS.
Aligning regulation with reality
HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell and National Coordinator Karen DeSalvo will both be on hand to share the latest accomplishments and goals of their organizations.  DeSalvo will discuss the ONC’s interoperability roadmap and share her views on the intersection between the regulatory environment and the private marketplace.
CMS experts will also host a session to give insight into the evolving role and requirements of the EHR Incentive Programs from now until 2017.  A separate listening session will allow attendees to hear about changes to meaningful use in 2018 and beyond, as the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) starts to come into play.
If you want to learn more about the activities of the Office of the Inspector General (OIG), stop in to hear Senior Counselor for HIT James A. Cannatti III explain how this regulatory body makes an impact in the healthcare information technology space.
The HIMSS ICD-10 Task Force will also be presenting a session on the impact of the new code set, and will reveal how the industry has fared since the largely uneventful October 1, 2015 transition date.
These sessions – and dozens more covering everything from HIPAA regulations to revenue cycle management to the Internet of Things – will give healthcare stakeholders an inside look into the most successful strategies and initiatives changing the face of the industry.
Be sure to follow HealthITAnalytics.com on Twitter for up-to-the-minute insights from the show floor, and don’t forget to sign up for our newsletter so you don’t miss a thing.
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsHIMSS16Population Health ManagementValue Based CareValue Based Reimbursement


