Docs “uncomfortable” testing, treating kids with genetic issues

November 21, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 21, 2013 - Despite the critical information inherent in family history information and genetic profiles, increasingly accessible through analytics to provide tailored treatments for individualized patients, many pediatricians are “uncomfortable” with providing care to children with genetic diseases and conditions, and few routinely add genetic testing and extensive family history data to their decision-making processes.
A survey of 88 pediatricians who are part of the American Academy of Pediatrics Quality Improvement Innovation Networks found that while 100% of physicians recognize the importance of taking a family history, less than one third gather a minimum of three generations of data, which is one of the standard pieces of a genetics-based medical evaluation.  Only half of the participants felt confident treating children with genetic conditions, and the majority stated that they only ordered genetic tests on patients other than newborns around three times a year at most.
“While genetics has historically been viewed as a discipline focused on rare conditions, recent genomic advances have highlighted that genetics has a role in common conditions encountered in primary care medicine,” said Beth Tarini, MD, MS, FAAP, senior author, assistant professor of pediatrics at the University of Michigan and co-medical director of the Genetics in Primary Care Institute.  “Unfortunately, most PCPs have received insufficient education and training about genetics, which has left them uncertain about their role in providing genetics related care.”
Researchers have been working to integrate genomic data into EHR systems and clinical decision support tools in order to identify and present treatments with the least detrimental side effects and highest rates of success. “We know that genetically, some patients respond better to some drugs than others,” explained Erwin Bottinger, MD, Principal Investigator of BioMe and Director of The Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, discussing a genetic database project at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York. “Our platforms are programmed to access that information to help physicians write informed prescriptions in the clinical setting.”
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
Cancer Moonshot Flags Basic Big Data Woes of Precision Medicine
“The struggle with genomics is how to make data readable for physicians who aren’t used to dealing with data all the time,” said Kari Cassel, CIO of University of Florida Health. “The question is how to make the data relevant.”  UF Health is solving the problem by integrating genetic results into EHR alerts integrated into the daily workflow.
For pediatricians who have the opportunity to identify life-long conditions while a patient is still young enough to prevent later complications, raising the comfort level with genomics is crucial. “PCPs play an integral role in caring for children with genetic conditions and it is vital that they feel comfortable identifying issues and providing comprehensive care to suit their patients’ unique needs,” said Michael L. Rinke, MD, Ph.D., lead author and assistant medical director for quality, at the Children’s Hospital at Montefiore, and assistant professor of pediatrics at Yeshiva University. “Thousands of children in the US are diagnosed with genetic disorders annually and in order to optimize outcomes for these patients, early identification and medical intervention is essential.”
  Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsEHR Patient DataMedical ResearchPatient Care


