Making the Financial Argument for Population Health Management

December 23, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 23, 2014 - The healthcare industry has had a difficult journey over the past few years as organizations struggle to automate their processes, become increasingly accountable to federal authorities, and attempt to start treating patients like valued customers. 
Blamed for skyrocketing costs of care, yet required to invest huge sums of money in EHR technology and large-scale reforms, it is easy to see why some organizations are just scraping by with the bare minimum required by CMS and the ONC to keep receiving their bread-and-butter Medicare and Medicaid payments.
But healthcare organizations can no longer hunker down, sit tightly, and simply hope to wait out the storm.  Those that do not adapt and take a proactive stance on adopting population health management, analytics technologies, clinical decision support tools, and health information exchange are likely to see themselves swept away into bankruptcy or forced into an acquisition or consolidation that might not be as favorable as they could like.
How can health information managers, care coordinators, quality officers, and informaticists convince their tired and frustrated executive leaders that it’s worth poking a toe into the pool of population health management?  They can start by voicing what the entire healthcare industry is thinking: that it’s all about the money – and that money isn’t necessarily a bad thing.
Healthcare is a business, and in order for providers to start treating it like one, they need to establish what their customers need and how to bring it to them.  Population health management accomplishes that by focusing on chronic disease management, which may be the biggest and most intractable problem that patients are facing today.
READ MORE: A Mere 3% of LTPAC Orgs Have Healthcare Data Analytics Tools
“Eighty percent of the issues our health system face today have to do with chronic diseases,” said Mansoor Khan, ScD, Chief Executive Officer of Alere Analytics.  “If we can really impact these issues on a population level, we can really make a difference in our ability to deal with both the quality of care and the costs of care.”
Patients don’t want to deal with diabetes or congestive heart failure on their own, and insurers don’t want to pay for what happens when confused and lost patients wander aimlessly along the care continuum, ending up in emergency rooms and inpatient wards when something goes wrong.  The opportunity for providers to step in and secure long-term customer loyalty from patients who will be needing care for decades should be irresistible to organizations seeking steady streams of revenue to keep themselves afloat.
Population health management programs can quickly and effectively help everyone out of the chronic disease maze.  Even by using EHR data at a relatively basic level, providers can stratify patients by risk, categorize them by chronic disease, and identify those that have not received primary or preventative care.  “Most organizations have the basic ability to provide a snapshot of their performance at a particular point in time,” states Luke Shulman, Principal Consultant at Arcadia Healthcare Solutions. “Add enough of these data points together and the resulting trend starts to show the bigger picture for performance, including opportunities for improvement.”
As payers continue to insist that patients choose a primary care provider, and as accountable care arrangements, bundled payments, and value-based reimbursements become the norm, providers are going to start to find that they are increasingly responsible for those patients that may drop in now and again for an antibiotic but have little sustained contact with the healthcare system.
“Not only can we see where our gaps in care are, but we can reach out to patients who are connected to us,” said Dr. Jonathon Truwit, Chief Medical Officer at Froedtert and the Medical College of Wisconsin, while discussing the benefits of implementing analytics and population health management.  “Maybe they’re only loosely connected to us, but attributed to us. It may be that you’re my patient, but you haven’t been seeing me in five years because you’re so healthy that you just come in when you have some urgent need or when you feel like it.  But I’m still responsible for you, from a population health point of view, whether I see you or not, because you’ve been assigned to us in the population health metrics.”
READ MORE: Revenue Cycle Analytics Enable Value-Based Care for Pediatrics Group
Wooing these patients back into contact with the healthcare system through outreach and patient engagement strategies can help providers ensure that they are meeting their financial responsibilities while keeping an eye on those at risk for the development of chronic disease that will impact the bottom line in the future.  Providers can use the same strategies to boost patient satisfaction with their care, which may in turn attract additional patients to the practice and increase market share.
As quality reporting programs move into their penalty phases and payers get increasingly strict about what they will and will not cover, providers that do not actively make the effort to nip chronic diseases in the bud are likely to join the 2600 hospitals dinged for readmission penalties that could chop up to 3% of Medicare reimbursements.  In the next few years, that number will jump to around 10% as the myriad quality reporting programs all start to nibble at provider payments.
At its core, it’s easy to see why investment in population health management is a matter of financial necessity.  After all, the investment in population health is rarely wasted.  As payers and patients band together to demand lower costs and better service, providers can meet their expectations while keeping their revenue cycle steady by incorporating population health as a key strategic competency as healthcare moves through the maelstrom of reform and into a brand new era of accountable, proactive, effective care.
Tagged Financial AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligencePopulation Health Management


