90% of patients would share data for analytics, research

April 29, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 29, 2014 - The vast majority of patients are willing to share their personal health information with researchers and physicians to help further the understanding of a disease – and a significant proportion of those people don’t even mind if the data isn’t anonymous.  In a poll conducted by Makovsky Health, 90% of patients indicated a desire to share data even as they collect information from a variety of online sources like pharmaceutical websites, WebMD, and Wikipedia.
More surprising than a general eagerness to share information is the number of patients who have little concern for privacy.  Twenty-six percent of the 1001 respondents said they didn’t care if their information was made anonymous, compared to 23% who wanted to control which pieces of data were anonymous and 40% who would share only if all their data was deidentified.
In addition to giving data, consumers are even more desirous of doing their own research and gleaning information from available sources on the web.  Smartphones are a frequent tool of online research, with 19% of patients using a phone to search online in the past year, while 11% turn to their tablets, too.
“In this data, we see strong evidence that consumers are ready to take charge of their health,” says Tom Bernthal, founder and CEO, Kelton Global. “Our work in consumer insights finds this proactive health-consciousness across the board. People are no longer satisfied with a passive role in their own healthcare.”
Dig Deeper
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
Are Clinical Trials Diverse Enough to Ensure Patient Safety?
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
“The on-the-go health information movement is integral to the care patients seek in addressing their medical interests,” added Gil Bashe, executive vice president, practice director, Makovsky Health. “When health concerns strike, people want information almost immediately. Our industry continues to place importance on the mobile user experience, as consumers increasingly use smartphones and are more receptive to information from pharmaceutical-sponsored sources than in years past.”
But patients will often turn to less-than-objective sources for their information.  Websites sponsored by pharmaceutical companies were trusted by more than a third of patients, and 55% of those who visit drug company sources were directed there by a healthcare provider.  Patients who are more willing to share their own information are also more willing to visit sponsored websites, the survey found.
Other trusted sites include WebMD, visited by 53% of respondents, and Wikipedia.  Advocacy and professional society websites, like those run by the American Cancer Society and American Heart Association, were also popular ways to research a condition.
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig DataClinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceMedical ResearchPatient Engagement


