PCORI Awards $2.5M to UAB for Precision Medicine Research

April 04, 2016

By Jacqueline LaPointe
April 04, 2016 - The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) has awarded $2.5 million to Jeffrey Curtis, MD, professor at the University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine (UAB), to research the comparative effectiveness of newer treatments for a variety of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases and advance precision medicine strategies, according to a recent press release.
New therapies, like biologic treatments, have significantly improved patient outcomes for chronic conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, Crohn’s and ulcerative colitis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriasis, and vasculitis,
But despite positive clinical reviews, healthcare providers and patients still question novel treatments because of a lack of research on the effectiveness and safety of newer therapies.
“Patients and physicians face many uncertainties when making treatment decisions,” said Curtis. “The safety profile of newer treatments is not well-established, and there are few studies of comparative effectiveness between newer treatments. Our research addresses these uncertainties and will bring improved decision-making about treatment.”
Dig Deeper
70% of Orgs Planning Precision Medicine Will Deploy Within 2 Years
Artificial Intelligence, Genomics Combo Boosts Precision Medicine
Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
Healthcare providers complain that published studies on newer treatments use clinical trial data and only include individuals who meet specific clinical trial criteria.
Additionally, the research usually excludes typical health issues, such as fatigue, even though these outcomes are a substantial burden on the patient. The studies concentrate on physician-derived, disease-specific clinical outcomes.
The research will develop a deeper understanding of different chronic condition therapies, which will help physicians and patients select the best personalized treatment. Healthcare providers rely on comparative effectiveness research to make appropriate treatment decisions.
To generate comparative effectiveness studies, UAB researchers will gather data and resources on chronic conditions that are usually treated with biologic and immunosuppressive medications from five patient-powered research networks (PPRNs) and two clinical data research networks.
UAB researchers will use EHR data from Clinical Data Research Networks (CDRNs), which link EHR information with hospital discharge and outpatient pharmacy data. Clinical data will be used to assess relationships between newer treatments and safety events such as heart attack, cancer, stroke, and hospital-acquired infections.
The research will also use patient-generated health information from the patient-powered research networks. The networks represent a different chronic condition. The data includes information on patient-reported outcomes rather than physician-derived outcomes.
Researchers will use the Clinical Data Research Network information to identify patients with the selected autoimmune and inflammatory conditions and ask them to join the respective patient-powered research network.
“Investigators will evaluate the effectiveness of disease-specific and crosscutting patient-reported outcomes collected directly from patients who are changing biologic and other treatments and will work with the five patient communities represented to track patient-reported outcomes,” stated the press release.
Through the studies of different diseases, PCORI aims to create more awareness about chronic condition treatments. Researchers will created a steering committee for each condition that includes healthcare providers, researchers, and patients.
Conclusions will also be published through the patient-powered research networks and distributed to associated medical societies and national patient advocacy groups.
The research conducted by UAB is part of the larger Nation Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network (PCORnet).
PCORnet was established by PCORI to “improve the nation’s capacity to conduct comparative clinical effectiveness research efficiently by creating a large, highly representative network for conducting clinical outcomes research that directly involves patients in the development and execution of the research,” explained the press release.
The UAB project expands the PCORnet influence by utilizing five out of 20 patient-centered research networks and encouraging more individuals to access and volunteer their EHR data. With more clinical and patient-generated data, PCORI will be closer to helping healthcare providers implement precision medicine into their healthcare routines.
“This project was selected for PCORI funding, not only for its scientific merit and commitment to engaging patients and other stakeholders, but also for its potential to fill an important gap in our health knowledge and give people information to help them weigh the effectiveness of their care options,” said Joe Selby, MD, MPH, PCORI Executive Director. “We look forward to following the study’s progress and working with Dr. Curtis to share the results.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPrecision Medicine


