Q&A: PCMH drove analytics, population health at Philly center

November 04, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 04, 2013 - For most people, a little incentive can go a long way towards galvanizing change, whether it’s customer reward points for buying certain products or a Christmas bonus at work for accomplishing a major goal.  For an organization like ChesPenn Health Services, which provides primary health and dental care for underserved patients outside of Philadelphia, the catalyst for introducing better population health management programs came from participation in the Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH) program.
Carol Mensch, MSN RN-BC, Performance Improvement Coordinator at ChesPenn, spoke with HealthITAnalytics to explain how applying for PCMH status helped to identify areas ripe for change, including standardization of workflow processes and improved population health powered by data analytics.
How long as your facility had an EHR?  What was implementation like?
We’ve had an EHR for a little over three years now.  I wasn’t here during the transition process – I’ve been here two years, and the EHR was in place before I got here, but that’s part of why they brought me in: to help standardize nomenclature and processes.  We are a hosted site of Crozier Health Center. ChesPenn is a community health organization with four sites outside of Philadelphia.
We get our IT services from Crozier, so we have a version of their GE Centricity EHR that’s more community-health oriented, and some IT needs are a little different for us.   Crozier has been able to tweak some things to make them more applicable to us.
READ MORE: Administrative Support Atop Barriers to Nursing Informatics
How do you use analytics in your day-to-day work?
We don’t have much in the way of analytics yet.  Whatever reports I can get out of the Centricity system, I run them, and summarize them and send them out.  I have four lead physicians, one at each of the sites, and I report to the CMO.  She reports to the CEO.  So I’ll do a summary of the monthly reports.  We’re pretty stable with meaningful use – we just finished our submission for one of our sites to become a patient-centered medical home (PCMH), and that push allowed us to focus on our standardization and analytics needs.
How has the PCMH model changed your practice?  Has it led to better population health management?
The PCMH model really standardizes things across health centers.  And for us, as a community health center, it really changes things to emphasize the patient-centered aspect of care.  We have challenging patients, so having them use a portal – they might not even be able to afford food to feed their families.  So having a computer or a smartphone to be able to make an appointment online?  This can be a challenge.  We are currently assessing this need right now via a survey with our patients.
One of the beauties of the PCMH is that it has allowed us to implement a lot of changes in the organization.  So you might have one provider who works with this one patient who comes in for a visit today.  Hopefully the provider addresses the urgent needs, and that’s a one-and-done case.  However, with PCMH, we’ve also been able to identify key clinical areas that we want to focus on as an organization.  Well, all of our patients have issues, and we can’t focus on all of them.  The fire hose approach just doesn’t work.  So we identified some of the key initiatives for the PCMH, and we decided we wanted to target patients that are diabetic and out of control as one example.  A lot of our patients are diabetic, but we picked those with an A1c greater than nine.
READ MORE: Geisinger, Baylor Granted $3.5M for Patient Safety Learning Lab
We have a big pediatric population. We decided to pick pediatric patients that have had Children and Youth Services (CYS) called in, because that might mean there’s a drug abuse problem in the home.  Well, not all CYS cases have a drug abuse problem, so we had be really careful identifying those particular patients that qualify for our special program.  We identified four or five different population sets that we’re targeting for special care within the PCMH framework.
But if we didn’t have that program, we as an organization probably wouldn’t have keyed in on particular needs like that.  We do follow the Healthy People goals which the government has identified for health centers to identify low birth weight infants or prenatal visits within the first trimester – there’s a whole series of goals for that program that we follow as well.  If we hadn’t gone the PCMH direction, that might have pushed us towards those population health features as well.  But having programs, that helps us focus and channel some of our areas of need.
Are you feeling comfortable about Stage 2 of Meaningful Use?
One of the big upcoming projects is implementing the patient portal.  That’s a huge initiative, and there are so many pieces we need to put in place to support it.  That’s also coming from Crozier, because as I mentioned, we use IT services from them.
Our funding comes from different government sources, so whatever the government says we need to do, that’s on the list of projects.  But for all of these quality measures and everything, we need the tools to measure them.  For the Healthy People program goals, I don’t really have a tool to use.  I don’t have a dashboard, so I have to run raw reports off the EHR system and translate those into Excel spreadsheets and then give those out.  So that’s just really unwieldy and clunky.  But right now that’s all I have.  There are some things that are potentially coming down the pike, but there’s nothing on my PC today.
READ MORE: Clinical Analytics Aid Payers, Providers with Value-Based Care
We are starting to look at the different thresholds for Stage 2 of meaningful use.  We know they’ll be higher.  Fifty percent today isn’t going to meet the new thresholds, so we look at what we can do to help raise our physicians’ percentages.
Are you preparing for ICD-10?
ICD-10 is coming up, too.  When Crozier and Centricity delivers our new system…we’re at their mercy when it comes to when that’s delivered.  I’ve been letting the people know that it’s coming and it’s going to be a big change.  Those that need to know are aware.
But meaningful use was really the driver for our documentation improvement, actually.   When some providers were slipping in their numbers, we found we were actually missing a field for a certain measure to be collected.  So we were able to get IT at Crozier to put the field for nutritional counseling, for example, on a particular screen for providers to now click to say that yes, they had counseled the patient or his parents in exercise and diet.  So now that’s reflected in our meaningful use numbers.
They’ve had the system in place for a few years, and it’s been working okay.  As a nursing informaticist, I can always see room for improvement.  However, change is just so challenging for everybody.  We’re just wading through meaningful use and PCMH to use that as a vehicle for change.
What would be your advice to other providers looking at analytics to improve patient care?
I really struggle with giving suggestions, because it depends on the business needs of the organization, and the patient safety and quality thrust of the organization.  Where are they focusing?  For so many organizations, it just comes down to who is paying them.  For us, unless we’re meeting the expectations of the people who pay our grants, and unless we keep getting patients through the door, we cease to exist.  I don’t want to say it comes down to that, but honestly?  It really does.
I mean, I’m a nurse, and for me, of course, it’s about the patient.  But we live in what’s called a food desert.  We just got a grocery store about a month ago, so maybe families can start purchasing healthier options rather than just chips and soda.  So the bigger picture is the patient’s health and their wellbeing, but if they don’t even have the ability to be eating right, to do what the doctor says in terms of nutrition and exercise…there’s a much bigger issue there.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealthcare InformaticsInformaticist SeriesNurse InformaticistsPopulation Health Management


