Stage 2 MU e-Prescribing Improves Diabetic Patient Safety

May 13, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 13, 2015 - Physicians who meet the e-prescribing thresholds of Stage 2 meaningful use are less likely to cause an adverse drug event (ADE) among their diabetic patients, reveals a new study from the Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA).  Co-authored by former National Coordinator Dr. Farzad Mostashari, the study suggests that providers who use e-prescribing more than 50 percent of the time for patients with diabetes have lower rates of ADEs, along with less frequent hospitalizations or emergency department visits for conditions related to diabetes medication errors.
“ADEs are of particular concern among Medicare beneficiaries due to the high incidence of chronic disease and polypharmacy among beneficiaries, especially those with diabetes,” the study says.  “Anti-diabetic agents, such as insulin and oral hypoglycemic agents, are the most common cause of ADEs and are in the top five causes of inpatient and treat-and-release emergency department (ED) visits for drug-related adverse events.”
To gauge the impact of e-prescribing on the growing diabetic population, the team of researchers from CMS, the ONC, AHRQ, and Dartmouth University examined Medicare claims from 2011, including patients who were flagged for diabetes in the CMS Chronic Condition Warehouse, a centralized repository for clinical research.  Close to 130,000 prescribers of diabetic medications were divided into two groups: “high prescribers,” who used e-prescribing for more than 50 percent of their medications, and “low prescribers,” who do not meet the 50 percent threshold, which is also the cut-off for successful participation in Stage 2 of the EHR Incentive Programs.
As of the middle of 2014, 70 percent of eligible providers had the capability to conduct e-prescribing through their EHR systems, the ONC reported, and more than 90 percent of community pharmacies were able to accept the electronic requests.  E-prescribing has been one of the most successful health IT initiatives associated with the EHR Incentive Programs, viewed favorably by providers and especially by their patients.  More than 80 percent of Medicare-aged patients now prefer their prescriptions to be transmitted electronically, a recent AHIMA study found, especially those taking multiple medications or juggling the management of more than one chronic disease.   
Dig Deeper
Unique Device Identifiers in Claims Could Aid Healthcare Analytics
How Big Data Velocity Informs Population Health, Patient Safety
Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
Twenty-five percent of the providers in the JAMIA study qualified as high prescribers based on their 2011 activities.  Only five percent of high e-prescribers had at least one patient who experienced an ADE within the study period, while 6.5 percent of low e-prescribers recorded the same.  Providers who did not meet the e-prescribing threshold had an ADE rate of 3.99 per thousand patients, compared to 3.45 per thousand patients for providers who more often used their health IT systems.
Providers who were identified as frequent e-prescribers were more likely to be younger, female, and operate in more urbanized areas.  Their patient populations tended to be somewhat more affluent – only 30 percent of high e-prescriber patients were categorized as majority low income compared to 39 percent of low e-prescribing providers.  Frequent e-prescribers also tended to serve lower proportions of black and Hispanic patients, as well as those with fewer co-morbidities.
“The importance of patient factors, such as comorbidity and low income, highlights that e-prescribing will not address all the factors leading to ADEs,” the study concludes. “The mechanisms by which e-prescribing may influence ADE stem largely from the provider side of ADE prevention.”
“Our report suggests that there is a statistically significant although small association of e-prescribing in the ambulatory setting with lower risk of ADEs significant enough to result in a visit to the hospital or ED. The findings of this study support previous hospital-based findings that MU measures are associated with a reduction of ADEs.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsPatient SafetyPopulation Health Management


