PCORI moves ahead with EHR, clinical analytics databank

April 18, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 18, 2014 - After announcing a nearly $100 million investment in connecting a series of research networks into a single, massive databank late last year, the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) is moving ahead with its efforts to create the largest research-focused health information repository the nation has ever seen.  PCORnet will connect anywhere from 26 million to 30 million patient lives and include clinical data from blood tests to MRI results to genetic samples.
“PCORnet will serve as an important foundation for transforming the nation’s healthcare system into one that is able to constantly learn what works best by facilitating more efficient comparative effectiveness research,” said Rachael Fleurence, PhD, Director of PCORI’s CER Methods and Infrastructure Program, in December of 2013. “It also will promote broader participation of patients, clinicians, health systems, and payers in the research process and help connect patients interested in participating in studies with researchers conducting trials.”
“Both the opportunity and the anxiety are pretty electrifying,” said Francis S. Collins, director of the National Institutes of Health, to the Washington Post.  The network will allow research scientists to identify patients for clinical trials in a more efficient and timely way, he says.  When designing a trial, “you have to enroll patients from the very beginning, and that’s a big infrastructure-building process that can take quite some time,” he explains. “And once a trial has been conducted, the whole thing has to be taken down again.  It’s a great way to answer one specific question, but it’s not an efficient way to ask lots of questions.”
PCORnet will provide a centralized database of information that will allow researchers to answer more complex queries based on real-world information.  While trials often try to isolate as much as possible to maintain scientific accuracy, the reality of co-morbidities and unexpected outcomes has led to hundreds of conflicting studies that are not entirely useful for everyday patient care and clinicians looking to make the best possible decisions.
Dig Deeper
Understanding the Many V’s of Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Healthcare CIOs Turning to Data Analytics for Business Intelligence
EHR, Big Data Analytics Success Hinges on Holistic Change Management
“We will be able to get answers with a degree of certainty that we’ve never had before,” said Joe V. Selby, PCORI’s executive director.  PCORnet will be “the holy grail” of healthcare research – if the developers can overcome the myriad technical obstacles involved in connecting individual research networks and data repositories.  Connecting eleven separate systems is no easy task, especially at such a large scale, and no one has ever tried to integrate such a huge volume of data in a similar way before.
Data governance questions have also cropped up as the developers debate patient privacy and access questions.  Each of the sub-networks will be allowed to decline participation in a particular project and will maintain possession of all personally identifiable information at all times.   But researchers who want to collect additional information on a patient’s history may need to obtain additional consent, and the rules governing the use of personal information can be difficult to navigate.
But with experts on hand and a willingness to collaborate featuring front and center in the ambitious project, PCORI has the chance to build an infrastructure that will accelerate the pace of medical research at a fraction of the current costs, says Brian Currie, Vice President for Medical Research at the Montefiore Medical Center, one of the New York institutions participating in the program. “It’s pushing all the fronts on how medical institutions do research.”
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureData CaptureData StorageHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare Data Strategy


