HIMSS Tool Offers New Healthcare Business Intelligence Insights

January 18, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 18, 2016 - HIMSS Analytics is adding to a heap of new offerings by introducing a tool that will allow healthcare organizations to glean deeper business intelligence insights from its storehouse of provider data. 
Logic, billed as a “comprehensive and intuitive global healthcare IT market intelligence tool,” will give users a look into several key areas of health IT concern, including the adoption of big data analytics and predictive analytics technologies, EHR purchases, implementations, and replacements, and strategically important information on competitors in the field.
"Our customers have come to rely on us for the most cutting edge, reliable insights and data. Now, with Logic, the industry can access actionable data faster than any other resource in the market," said Blain Newton, Chief Operating Officer of HIMSS Analytics.
"Logic is also unique in that it offers benefits for organizations both large and small – tech giants and emerging companies alike can leverage Logic to improve their understanding of the marketplace."
Dig Deeper
Healthcare CIOs Turning to Data Analytics for Business Intelligence
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Healthcare Business Intelligence, Big Data Tools Spark Investment
The business intelligence offering complements HIMSS Analytics’ focus on helping healthcare organizations define and leverage the value of healthcare information technology. 
As the industry moves far beyond basic EHR adoption, it is not always easy to choose health IT investments that will produce maximum financial and clinical return.
“Organizations are looking for guidance and help in understanding how to actually optimize and leverage these systems to achieve value,” Newton said to HealthITAnalytics.com while discussing another recent innovation, the HIMSS Value Score. “Whether that value is improved clinical outcomes, improved financial returns, or increased patient provider satisfaction and engagement, it really comes down to how you use these tools to maximize your return on the investment.”
The Value Score is, in itself, an adjunct to the foundational EMR Adoption Model (EMRAM), which has become an industry standard for gauging the maturity of health IT infrastructure adoption.  HIMSS has also participated in the development of the DELTA Powered Analytics Suite, which assesses an organization’s progress towards nurturing a comprehensive big data analytics ecosystem.
Ultimately, HIMSS hopes that these scoreboards and assessments will drive providers towards greater heights of innovation as top rankings become a competitive advantage.  EMRAM Stage 6 and Stage 7 organizations are never slow to publish press releases boasting about their achievements, and HIMSS plans to continue encouraging advancement in technology adoption and clinical care.
“We want to encourage and reward the organization that are out on the vanguard doing really interesting things, and leveraging IT in different ways that over time will inform the industry and will ultimately become a broader set of best practices that more organizations can apply,” Newton said, noting that the Value Score emphasizes the importance of creativity and continued innovation as part of its methodology.  “It’s really about giving some recognition to the risk-takers who are doing creative things that are driving the industry forward.”
Logic is HIMSS’ attempt to operationalize all of the data the organization has been collecting through these evaluations and its other efforts to keep tabs on the progress of the healthcare continuum. 
The business intelligence tool will offer the ability to create dashboards and data visualizations that enable a deep dive into critical market features such as organizations’ financial health, upcoming mergers and acquisitions, services offered, and their participation in accountable care arrangements and health information exchanges.  Users can also filter organizations by their EMRAM score.
"For providers, the road to value is an important but challenging journey. Having the market insights into what technologies providers are leveraging – insights that HIMSS Analytics has long provided the industry – is an important resource for all hospitals and health systems," said Adrienne Edens, Sutter Health Valley Area CIO and HIMSS Board Member. "Logic will also ensure that providers are being approached with the services and technologies that they actually need to improve care."
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data Strategy


