United cuts more Medicare doctors to control costs in MA

June 10, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 10, 2014 - After taking similar actions in Rhode Island and Connecticut late last year, national insurer UnitedHealthcare plans to eliminate about 700 Massachusetts physicians from its Medicare Advantage network as a way to control costs within the healthcare system, reports the Boston Globe.  The move reignites a heated debate about the role of private insurers who attempt to foist high costs onto competitors with maneuvering that ultimately puts vulnerable patients at risk of losing access to their physicians.  While UnitedHealthcare says that pruning the system will ultimately result in higher quality care for patients, lawmakers and beneficiaries alike are dismayed by payer’s activities.
“This phenomenon is nationwide and needs to be addressed,” Senator Richard Blumenthal (D-CT), said.  UnitedHealthcare, the nation’s largest provider of Medicare Advantage plans, made similar cuts to Connecticut doctors last year. “I’m reviewing possible legislation that would prevent this kind of draconian discharge of providers from networks serving Medicare Advantage patients.”
“Network restructuring is the new normal. It’s not just UnitedHealthcare, but that’s the way health plans will be operating in the future,” countered Dr. Sam Ho, UnitedHealthcare’s chief medical officer, speaking to the Boston Globe. “Healthcare is going through so many significant changes that it’s no longer a matter of doctors providing services and health plans paying claims, but a focus on the quality and cost effectiveness of those services.”
Physicians who do not provide cost effectiveness to the private insurance industry, such as those who typically treat complex, high-cost patients, may see themselves hung out to dry.  Over the past six months, the network will have cut 35,000 physicians, representing about 10% of its former empire and affecting up to 300,000 seniors who will need to find new providers of primary and specialty care.  In Rhode Island, providers affected by the changes accused UnitedHealthcare of forcing its major competitor, BlueCross BlueShield of Rhode Island, to take on the high-cost patients it is divesting.
Dig Deeper
ECRI: “Most If Not All” Patient Identification Errors Preventable
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Regional Variation Points Out Value of Antibiotic Stewardship
“Our patients are freaking out. Literally, there was a woman shaking,” said Dr. Lynn Iler, an East Greenwich dermatologist who treats many elderly patients with recurring skin cancers.  She predicted that a number of her patients would move to BCBS in order to stay at the practice.  “So Blue Cross loses and United wins.”
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts, however, is putting a positive spin on the changes after it added 750 physicians to its network by taking on three Massachusetts hospitals this year.  “We are competing to grow our Medicare Advantage network, not make it smaller,” said Ken Arruda, executive director of Medicare markets for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts. “We see this as an opportunity for our company.”
Nonetheless, lawmakers are rallying to the cause by introducing legislation that would prohibit Medicare Advantage payers from dropping physicians in the middle of the year and without cause.  Rep. Rose DeLauro (D-CT) plans to introduce a patient’s bill of rights to prevent corporate abuse of Medicare plans following a lawsuit by a pair of doctors’ groups protesting UnitedHealthcare’s actions in the state.
As payers attempt to cope with the higher costs imposed by the Affordable Care Act, the healthcare industry is likely to see more finagling that puts access to the healthcare system in jeopardy, contrary to the ACA’s ultimate mission.  CMS has acknowledged that the industry is in need of help to address the situation, and is in the process of establishing policy to limit how insurers dump physicians.  The policy would not be effective until 2015, however, leaving elderly patients on their own for the moment.
Tagged Hospital QualityMedicarePatient CareQuality Of Care


