CMS will institute five star hospital quality ratings system

July 09, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 09, 2014 - CMS is taking a page out of the online retail industry’s book by instating a simple five star rating system for hospitals to be included on its Hospital Compare website, says Dr. Patrick Conway, CMS Chief Medical Officer and Deputy Administrator for Innovation and Quality in a blog post. For consumers used to making up their minds with a glance at the top of a webpage, the star rating system seems like a positive development.  But for hospitals used to being judged on an incredibly complex system of quality measures, reducing all their hard work to such a basic graphic could be frustrating.
“It can be overwhelming when consumers are faced with having to choose a health care provider, such as a hospital, nursing home, or physician,” Conway writes on the CMS blog. “Providers differ in the safety and quality of care they give, and having quality ratings available to compare providers can help consumers make more informed health care decisions. That’s why CMS is committed to making it easier to use the information on our Compare sites.”
Hospitals will start getting star ratings later in 2014 and early 2015, Conway says.  Some CMS Compare websites already use the rating system, including Nursing Home Compare and Physician Compare, on a limited basis.  While CMS believes that the system will “empower consumers with information to make more informed health care decisions, encourage providers to strive for higher levels of quality, and drive overall health system improvement,” some hospitals and professional societies have balked at the idea since it was raised in 2013.
“The Association of American of Medical Colleges (AAMC) strongly opposes the use of a star rating system, which may make inappropriate distinctions for hospitals whose performance is not statistically different,” the organization wrote in a letter to CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner last year. “A star rating system can also exaggerate minor performance differences on measures.”
Dig Deeper
Clinical Decision Support App May Cut CTs for Head Injuries
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Why Patient-Reported Outcomes Data is Key to Healthcare Quality
The star system already in use for the rating of nursing homes does not seem overly harsh, however, with each category judged on how the facility compares with the average based on measures that are already publically available.  The stars are used for visual effect above captions that explain whether the organization has ranked above, below, or just about average on certain criteria.
“While consumers are the main audience for the Compare sites, stakeholders and partners can visit Data.Medicare.gov and use the same data that power the Compare websites in easy-to-use formats,” Conway adds. “We’re excited to make this available so that you can use the same set of authoritative data in your work. CMS is committed to providing useful and current quality performance data.”
Tagged Healthcare Business IntelligenceHospital QualityPatient Satisfaction


