IBM pours $1 billion into big data with Watson supercomputer

January 15, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 15, 2014 - The Jeopardy! champion supercomputer is retiring from the glamour of game shows and getting its servers dirty with some serious analytics work.  While Watson has already been given a crash-course in clinical decision support and dabbled in cancer research, IBM has much bigger plans for the brainy bundle of processors.  Big Blue will be pouring a billion dollars into big data, teaching Watson how to crunch numbers to aid in clinical trials, predict patient outcomes, and sift through enormous amounts of data, bringing actionable insights to hospitals and researchers at an unimaginably quickened pace.
“Watson is the solution to today’s influx of information, delivered from the cloud and ready to be the ultimate advisor for faster, more accurate decisions,” said Michael Rhodin, Senior Vice President, IBM Watson Group, during an unveiling in New York City. “By bringing a new generation of Watson-powered services to the marketplace, IBM is transforming industries and professions. These new cognitive computing innovations are designed to augment users’ knowledge, be it the researcher exploring genetic data to create new therapies or a business executive who needs evidence-based insights to make a crucial decision.”
IBM announced several analytics services during the event.  IBM Watson Analytics will allow users to create and manipulate big data insights through visualizations.  The visual representations will help professionals without advanced data science training interact with data through a natural language interface.  Watson Explorer provides a unified dashboard for a client’s data assets, allowing organizations to develop tailored applications of their own.
Meanwhile, the Watson Discover Advisor hopes to reduce the amount of time necessary to parse through large amounts of journal articles, studies, and data sets involved in conducting pharmaceutical trials and other medical research.   Watson will not only speed projects to their resolution, but will also offer researchers new perspectives and unique connections between data points that its human operators may not have thought of.
Dig Deeper
Desire for Predictive Analytics Outpaces Hospital Investment
CancerLinQ Brings Big Data Insights to Oncology with FDA, NCI Partners
Understanding the Many V’s of Healthcare Big Data Analytics
“As a provider of data-driven content that helps professionals augment their knowledge, we are constantly seeking ways to empower our clinician users with fast, relevant access to the evidence they need, be it to strengthen their research or make timely, evidence based decisions,” said Jay Katzen, President, Elsevier Clinical Solutions. “We believe Watson is a powerful technology that, for example, can help clinicians research more highly targeted information to improve the outcomes for their patients. That’s why Elsevier is helping the IBM Watson Group shape a cloud-delivered solution designed to accelerate and strengthen research-driven discoveries.”
What makes Watson unique is not just its processing power.  It uses machine learning to adapt to new challenges and draw increasingly complex conclusions based on its prior experiences.  “If you take it at its essence, at its core, it’s a system that understands natural language,” says Michael Rhodin, leader of the Watson Group. “It reads. When it reads a lot, it adapts and learns. It gets smarter.”
“When you ask it questions, it will generate hypotheses–potential answers–with a degree of confidence.  It doesn’t just learn from what it knows today,” he added.  “You can add new data to it. It reads new books every day. It connects the dot from what it just read to what it has already read. Sometimes what it just read contradicts what it’s already read. It has to sort that out. As we start to move forward, Watson’s getting smarter. We’re adding new capabilities to it. It’s learning to reason, to think through things.”
Later this year, IBM plans to add its Watson Engagement Advisor to the suite of new offerings, which may help providers gain a better understanding of what they need to do in order to achieve the standards of Stage 2 of Meaningful Use, as well as how to better hook patients in to managing their own care and responding to population health outreach initiatives.
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataClinical AnalyticsFinancial AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data AnalyticsMedical Research


