Clinical Analytics, Risk Scores Support Diabetes Interventions

February 20, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 20, 2015 - When it comes to diabetes, chronic disease management can’t be a one-size-fits-all proposition, says a team of researchers from the University of Michigan, VA Ann Arbor Health System, and Tufts Medical Center.  In a study published in the British Medical Journal (BMJ) this month, lead author Jeremy Sussman, MD, MS and his colleagues explain how seven clinical risk factors can predict the development of diabetes in at-risk patients, and how clinical analytics can help providers to implement effective interventions.
“Simply having pre-diabetes is not everything,” said Sussman, who is assistant professor of general medicine at the University of Michigan Medical School, in a press release. “This really shows that within the realm of pre-diabetes there’s a lot of variation, and that we need to go beyond single risk factors and look holistically at who are the people in whom a particular approach works best.”
The team used data from the CDC’s Diabetes Prevention Program to analyze the medical histories of more than 3000 patients with high body mass index and abnormal fasting blood glucose.  During the study, they looked at 17 possible risk factors for the development of diabetes, whittling the list down to seven major elements that best predict diabetes: fasting blood glucose levels, long-term A1C levels, a family history of high blood sugar, and triglyceride levels, as well as waist measurement, height, and waist-to-hip ratio.
The patients were assigned a risk score based on these factors, and divided into three groups: a control group, a group receiving metformin as an intervention, and a group that was provided with lifestyle coaching to improve their diet and exercise.  Fasting blood plasma glucose was the most important predictor of diabetes development, the study found, followed by a self-reported history of high blood sugar.
Dig Deeper
Research Collaboration to Use Big Data for Diabetes Prevention
Optum Risk Management Analytics Cut Opioid Use by 14%
Using Claims, Lab, and Clinical Analytics to Discover Diabetics
When sorted by risk score, the patients with the lowest 25% of scores had a mean 6.9% chance of moving from pre-diabetes to diabetes within three years.  In contrast, the top quarter of patients had an average 45% risk.  Patients at the top of the scale were 6.5 times more likely to develop diabetes than those at the low end.
The clinical analytics study also found a significant difference in the effectiveness of interventions for this patient cohort.  Patients with the highest risk scores were much more likely to benefit from metformin treatment than those with lesser scores.  When treated with metformin, the lowest quarter actually had a very slightly higher risk of developing diabetes than a control group, while patients most at risk had a 21.4% reduction in their risk of developing diabetes when given metformin instead of receiving no treatment.
For the lifestyle intervention group, patients with low scores saw a 4.9% risk reduction, while patients with the highest scores saw a 28.3% reduction in their likelihood of becoming diabetic.  The results from the lifestyle changes were distributed much more evenly across the population than positive impacts from metformin use, the researchers said, which were unusually skewed towards high-risk patients.  “These results could decrease drug overuse, help to prioritize lifestyle programs, and be a model for the secondary analysis of randomized trials,” they wrote.
“Implementation of these results could make prevention of diabetes much more efficient while lowering rates of adverse events,” the study says.  “Understanding these dramatic variations can enhance our ability to use these interventions more effectively and efficiently by tailoring our decisions about treatment to individual patients’ circumstances and preferences.”
The authors add that their risk model could complement other clinical analytics and population health management tools by becoming integrated into EHRs or the workflows of accountable care organizations in order to bring more personalized patient information into the equation.
“Clinicians often have additional information not accounted for by the risk tool, such as the patient’s personal dislike of drugs or the components of a lifestyle intervention, the severity of a patient’s family history, or the patient’s frailty and comorbidities. The results of the benefit based tailored treatment analysis can help to guide decisions, but good clinicians should also consider other factors.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


