HHS nominee: Data analytics, care coordination top priorities

May 12, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 12, 2014 - With Kathleen Sebelius turning in her resignation as Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services after a rocky year overseeing the launch of Healthcare.gov, Congress is ready to fill the top HHS spot with presidential nominee Sylvia Mathews Burwell.  Burwell’s confirmation hearing took place late last week, and there was no shortage of praise from lawmakers on both sides of the aisle as she stressed the critical importance of a data-driven approach to healthcare reform.
“I believe in any organization you need to start with setting goals, defining roles and responsibilities, and a part of that is an analytical process that includes both listening as well as analytics and data,” Burwell said when asked about how to break down the organizational silos that threaten to isolate information and stymie the capacity for care coordination and interdepartmental cooperation. “That’s the first step. Another step is building strong teams and empowering them and giving them the tools to succeed.”
“The third part, I believe, is thinking through when you need to drive with analytics and when you need to understand that there’s emotion, because in leading large organizations, there is sometimes how people perceive and whether it’s in an organization or an issue. The perception is their reality, so with analytics you need to understand that if people believe that, how you drive for change.”
As healthcare organizations seek ways to reduce operational and clinical inefficiencies that widen gaps in the quality of care, providers are increasingly turning to the data they already own in order to craft more detailed portraits of their internal operations.  But they are also reaching out to their clinical and business partners to widen the perspective, taking population health management more seriously as quality penalties come into effect and chronic diseases continue to deepen the financial burdens of providers across the spectrum.
Dig Deeper
Understanding the Many V’s of Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Early Adopters Question Usefulness, Maturity of AI in Healthcare
EHR, Big Data Analytics Success Hinges on Holistic Change Management
“In terms of information sharing, what is it that creates that level of coordination?  How do you get to the key element that is causing the delivery system efficiency?” Burwell asked.  “Is it the fact that it is a single provider, or is it the fact that it is a standardized approach and information? One of the ways you work to get that balance right is by trying to understand as clearly as possible what is driving the change you’re getting both in terms of quality and price.”
Tagged Data StorageHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data AnalyticsHealthcare Data Governance


