Hospitalized seniors need significant decision-making help

January 24, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 24, 2014 - About half of elderly patients hospitalized for more than 48 hours for any reason need significant help from caregivers and family members to make decisions about their own care, says a new study published in JAMA this week.  From discharge planning to life support wishes, seniors often lack the capacity to make such choices for themselves, and clinicians are often unaware of the degree of reliance these patients must place on their family.
Researchers from Indiana University observed more than 1000 elderly patients identified by their physicians as requiring major medical decisions.  After two days in the hospital, more than two-thirds of seniors faced a significant decision in their care, and 47.4% of seniors needed help from a surrogate to come to a conclusion.  Half of those patients required a caregiver to make every decision on their behalf.  Nearly sixty percent of those decisions involved life-sustaining care, while half needed help with discharge planning.  Patients who needed such help experienced a more complex course of treatment over their hospital stay, including a greater use of ventilators and feeding tubes, and experienced higher mortality rates.
“As the population ages, a greater number of hospitalized older adults will have impaired cognition due to a rising prevalence of Alzheimer disease, delirium, and other related disorders. Such patients often face major decisions about their medical care at a time when they cannot communicate their preferences or participate in decision making,” the study explains.  “The presence of a surrogate requires fundamental changes in the way that clinicians communicate and make decisions. Some evidence suggests that key decisions, such as writing do-not-resuscitate orders, may even be delayed when surrogates are required to make these decisions.”
A mere 7.4% of patients had a living will, and 25% had a healthcare representative document present in their medical record.  The researchers note that the number of legal directive documents in existence may exceed those available in the healthcare setting, which represents a gap in communication that should be addressed.
Dig Deeper
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
How Patient Safety Organizations Encourage Data Collection, Quality Care
Designated surrogates were most often close family members.  Fifty-eight percent were daughters of the patients, while sons and spouses evenly split the remainder.  “In the hospital, family members are considered ‘visitors’ rather than crucial participants in their family member’s care,” the study notes. “In-depth interviews with surrogates conducted as part of the current study found that surrogates often have trouble contacting hospital staff and struggle for information about the patient. Clinicians also frequently report making decisions with surrogates to be highly stressful.”
“Novel approaches to support decision making and communication in the hospital setting must include a focus on incapacitated patients and explicitly address the role of surrogate decision makers,” the authors state. “The current hospital structures and routines of daily bedside rounds are built on the assumption that the patient can provide historical information and make decisions independently. Perhaps because of this, there are substantial barriers to communication for surrogate decision makers.”
Tagged Hospital QualityPatient CarePatient SafetyPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


