Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research

November 13, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 13, 2017 - The American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) and non-profit Research to Prevent Blindness (RPB) are offering thousands of dollars in grant funding for research projects that leverage the IRIS Registry database to identify new approaches for eliminating preventable blindness.
$35,000 in funding will be available for research teams that employ big data analytics and population health management techniques to leverage data on more than 41 million patients in the world’s largest specialty registry.
"In a short amount of time, the IRIS Registry has become a sought-after tool for data analytics, producing insights into real-world practice patterns and clinical outcomes," said David W. Parke II, MD, CEO for the American Academy of Ophthalmology.
Dig Deeper
Humana: Can Artificial Intelligence, NLP, Voice Tools Revamp EHRs?
Tech Giants Give Healthcare Artificial Intelligence Start-Ups a Boost
NIH Awards $9M for Open Source, Cloud-Based Big Data Commons
More than 13,000 clinicians working in ophthalmology practices have signed up to contribute data to the registry through their electronic health records, the registry website says.  The data is deidentified before being aggregated and shared with approved researchers.
Several studies and academic journal articles utilizing the big data registry have already been published – AAO and Research to Prevent Blindness hope that the IRIS Registry will support many more novel ideas about best practices for treatment and patient management.
"The next step is to develop opportunities for engaging clinical researchers to analyze this unique, growing resource to reveal patterns of disease, their determinants, and approaches to prevention and treatment that advance the ophthalmic profession to the beneﬁt of our patients – present and future," said Parke.
Academic researchers with experience in population health management, ophthalmology, epidemiology, and other related fields are encouraged to apply for the grants.  Proposals must be original, data-driven, and focused on preventing vision loss and creating healthier lives for patients.
"We are thrilled to partner with the American Academy of Ophthalmology on this novel award, which gives researchers the power of big data to answer important questions about vision at the population level," said Brian F. Hofland, PhD, president of Research to Prevent Blindness.
"RPB catalyzes innovation by supporting excellent research and the IRIS Registry's unique data offers a powerful resource to conduct new, important, and impactful vision research."
Interested parties may apply for the grant program until January 31, 2018.  More information is available here.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureChronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation Health ManagementPreventative Care


