Study: Socioeconomics, communities play role in cardiac health

August 08, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 08, 2014 - Patients of lower socioeconomic status (SES) were about 7% more likely to experience a hospital readmission for cardiac issues than similar patients with higher SES, finds a study in the American Heart Association’s Circulation journal.  While mortality rates were similar across income levels, the study indicates that lifestyle factors influenced by income level, neighborhood attributes such as access to healthy food sources, and the availability of healthcare providers can significantly affect cardiovascular health for patients.
The study attempts to address a population health management question that hasn’t been sufficiently answered by other academic work: does the neighborhood shape the patient, or do non-adherent patients with high risk factors for chronic diseases shape their locations?
“We do not know whether the association between neighborhood SES and heart failure outcomes exists because neighborhood is a proxy for individuals’ SES or it has an effect that is independent of an individual’s SES,” the authors write.  “Such distinction is critical in determining what factors influence heart failure outcomes and whether interventions specifically designed to address neighborhood and contextual factors are needed in addition to interventions that address individual-level risk factors.”
The study examined 1557 patients from low, middling, and high socioeconomic status areas.  Low-SES patients were less likely to be white, highly educated, and earning more than $10,000 per year.  They tended to be younger and have a higher body mass index than other groups.  However, high-SES patients were more likely to be cigarette smokers and to suffer from coronary artery disease.  During the study period, 47.8% of patients experienced at least one hospital readmission, including 272 low-SES patients, 242 medium-SES patients, and 231 high-SES patients.
Dig Deeper
Top 5 Collaborative Tasks for Population Management, Public Health
Kaiser Permanente Program Reduces Cardiovascular Disease Risks
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
After adjusting for a number of variables, including demographics, New York Heart Association functional class, comorbidities and lab test results, the low-SES patients were 7.2% more likely to be readmitted within six months.  They were also 1.46 times more likely to experience worse outcomes than higher income groups.  The study confirms that outcomes are based on more than just the individual patient’s socioeconomic status, but that poor results are rooted in residential location as well.
While multiple factors, including care coordination, hospital quality, primary care access, and personal lifestyle choices do contribute to an individual’s cardiovascular outcomes, the study asserts that many of these variables are embedded in the culture and character of a neighborhood, which produces a significant effect on the way patients receive care and act upon their providers’ instructions.
The authors note that long term follow-up may be necessary to add weight to the study, especially in the examination of mortality rates beyond six months.  Meanwhile, providers interested in population health management may wish to address the social and economic issues of their patients in addition to individual risk factors in order to provide comprehensive lifestyle support for those at risk.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


