54% of providers think data transparency will boost quality

September 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 03, 2014 - Care quality and the transparency of financial and clinical data go hand in hand according to a majority of providers taking part in a poll by the American College of Physician Executives (ACPE).  Open access to pricing information for consumers will allow patients to make better choices about their care, advocates argue, strengthen the patient-provider relationship, and drive providers to improve quality to match the astronomical fees that they charge under traditional fee-for-service reimbursement models.
While providers are still wary of making all of their financial data public, there is a strong sense that liberating some information will be beneficial for patients while driving down inflated spending and Medicare fraud.  Fifty-four percent of the 630 respondents believe that transparency of financial data is a positive step towards shoring up trust between providers and patients, while 24 percent believe that the practice will have little to no impact on their relationship with patients.
“No matter what your opinion may be, the trend toward greater transparency is continuing to gain momentum,” said Peter Angood, MD, FRCS(C), FACS, FCCM, the president and CEO of ACPE. “As physician leaders, we need to get involved to help ensure the quality of the data is high and the public receives the necessary information to make informed decisions.”
Physicians were nearly evenly split on whether or not Medicare data should be made public, with 46% believing it should remain private and 41.8% preferring to the share the information.   While the American Hospital Association (AHA) has called for an expansion of Medicare data transparency, the first wave of data released by CMS earlier in 2014 was seen as embarrassing and potentially damaging to certain provider groups who were raking in exorbitant amounts of money from the nation’s largest payer.
Dig Deeper
Why Healthcare Should Study Up on Lessons Learned in Fintech
Data Analytics, PDMP Use Can Combat the Opioid Crisis
Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
The release also prompted concerns about how patients would interpret the newly public claims data, with the Medical Group Management Association (MGMA) noting that the move could have “unintended consequences” for beneficiaries. “This release could result in patients making decisions about their care based on faulty assumptions about physicians,” the organization said in April. “Claims data are not a proxy for quality, especially when provided in isolation, from a single payer.”
Some providers who commented on the ACPE poll seemed to believe that data transparency would not be without its growth pains, but that it could produce long-term benefits.  “Transparency isn’t always the easiest thing to do, but certainly the right thing to do,” wrote William Casperson, MD, FACS, CPE, FACPE. “Decades of opacity have led to suspicion and distrust towards our medical system. It will require consistent transparency over a long period of time to recover.”
“The health care industry is bleeding the country dry,” added Bruce Bender, MD, MS, FACPE. “If costs are to be reduced by a third, we need to know where the real corruption and waste lie, and physicians need to be at the forefront of fixing it. The more we resist, the more we are part of the problem.”
Tagged Financial AnalyticsHealthcare Data Analytics


