Can Healthcare Effectively Measure Patient Engagement?

March 12, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 12, 2015 - Patient engagement is considered so important to the larger goals of healthcare reform that it is included as one of the three branches of the Triple Aim.  While the EHR Incentive Programs measure patient engagement by portal log-ins and data downloads, the real meaning of the term is much deeper and broader than that.
In an era where the majority of patients require some degree of chronic disease management and the delivery of patient-centered care is one of the most important hallmarks of quality and metrics for reimbursement, can the healthcare industry effectively measure what patient engagement means, how it takes place, and how it improves outcomes?
At the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), a Patient Engagement Advisory Council has been attempting to tackle this very question.  With more than twenty representatives, including policy makers, researchers, clinicians, patients, and care givers, the Council is dedicated to improving patient engagement in medical research and fostering an environment of patient-centered care throughout the healthcare delivery continuum.
PCORI funds a number of research projects and pilot programs aimed at including the patient voice and experience in medical research and population health management initiatives.  It also provides a patient engagement rubric to help study architects ensure that they are including the patient engagement perspective in their research designs.
But gauging the direct impact of these efforts on improved outcomes and higher quality care can be difficult, as a new Government Accountability Office (GAO) report on PCORI’s efforts noted.  “PCORI’s evaluation plans rely on survey development, focus groups and interviews, data extraction from PCORI databases, and expert panels,” the report says. “In its plans, PCORI identifies potential response bias and self-report bias as limitations to some of those data collection methods.”
READ MORE: Peterson Center Initiative Transforms Delivery of Primary Care
The sheer length of time it takes for clinical research to impact daily patient care is also a factor in measuring the effectiveness of improved patient engagement, GAO says.  “Past research suggests that it takes more than 17 years for research evidence to affect clinical practice settings,” the report says, yet the timeframes for most PCORI projects range from five to ten years.  This relative immediacy is critical for the healthcare system, which is transitioning to value-based payments determined by patient outcomes at a meteoric pace.
And time isn’t the only problem.  Understanding what patient engagement really is, what level of engagement is necessary to produce meaningful outcomes, and how to bring successful strategies into the clinical workflow are questions that can’t be answered without some amount of data.  But what metrics can really define the impact of a patient using a fitness tracker to lose weight, emailing with a nurse to get a referral to a psychologist for depression, or dialing in to a telehealth service for help with her blood sugar control?
The Partnership to Improve Patient Care (PIPC), while discussing PCORI’s influences last year, raised the same query.  How can you measure bad outcomes that don’t happen because they were prevented by preemptive actions?
At a roundtable discussion, “an analogy was presented of the New York Police Department seeking to lower crime, but measuring numbers of arrests and reported crimes, which were inputs that did not necessarily indicate the output of lower crime,” PIPC says. “Since the outcome the city wanted to achieve was lower crime, the police became accountable for lower crime rates as opposed to counting inputs such as numbers of arrests and crime reports. And as a result, crime went down.”
Some providers might argue that the outcomes are all that matter, since that’s how they will be judged for reimbursement purposes.  Yet understanding how to lower preventable readmissions, reduce unnecessary ED use, or improving hypertension control is critically important for those thousands of organizations that have not yet taken steps towards utilizing patient engagement for improved population health.
READ MORE: MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
While the answer may be lurking somewhere in PCORI’s ambitious and important body of research, healthcare providers will need to be diligent about measuring their own patient engagement activities while the numbers are being crunched.  Organizations attesting to Stage 2 meaningful use will already be watching their patient portal sign-up numbers very carefully.  But providers can also perform their own analytics on patients who are overdue for services but take the initiative to catch up, or those who turn poor chronic disease management around when offered a care coordinator or an mHealth device.
Patient engagement, by its very nature, is a personal activity that must be encouraged and sustained by the individual himself.  In a patient-centered care environment, it is the provider’s job to help those patients along their personal care journey, delivering the self-management tools necessary to produce improved results.
While large and more formalized studies are underway, and stakeholders continue to debate the best methods to effectively measure the impact of patient engagement techniques, providers can contribute to the pool of outcomes data by pursuing population health management strategies that are already showing results for patients every day.
  Tagged Accountable CareEHR and Patient EngagementPopulation Health Management


