PA Establishes Prescription Drug Database for Care Coordination

October 29, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
The new electronic monitoring database aims to help reduce substance abuse and provide better coordination of care.
October 29, 2014 - Pennsylvania will establish a statewide prescription drug database in an attempt to improve care coordination and reduce doctor shopping and other drug seeking behaviors from patients who may be suffering an addiction to controlled substances.  The electronic monitoring system will not only provide data to physicians on recent controlled prescriptions written by other providers, but will allow patients to access their own medication histories to help them make better decisions.
“Prescription-drug monitoring will provide access for health care professionals to enhance a patient’s coordination of care so that we can support individuals who suffer with prescription-drug addiction,” said Governor Tom Corbett after signing Senate Bill 1180 into law.
“A strong and effective prescription-drug monitoring program will result in better health outcomes for Pennsylvanians,” added State Physician General Dr. Carrie DeLone. “Health care professionals will now be able to check if their patient recently had a prescription filled and either safely prescribe medication or identify individuals who may have a prescription-drug addiction so that they can be properly referred for treatment.”
In 2010, Pennsylvania ranked 14th on the list of states with the highest number of deaths from drug overdoses with 15.3 deaths per 100,000 residents.  In addition to the social toll of drug abuse, the healthcare system spends more than $120 billion a year on expenses related to alcohol and drug misuse, and is constantly seeking better tools to prevent patients from improperly accessing controlled substances.
Dig Deeper
CT Medical Society Announces New Health Information Exchange
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
IBM Bets Big on Blockchain for Value-Based Care, Data Exchange
Nearly every other state in the country has some form of electronic drug monitoring system in place, and growing research from organizations such as the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP) Center of Excellence, based at Brandeis University, indicates that the systems can be cost effective while reducing key drug-related problems.
“A study of medical providers in Ohio emergency departments found that 41% of those given PDMP data altered their prescribing for patients receiving multiple simultaneous narcotics prescriptions,” says a recent report.  “Of these providers, 61% prescribed no narcotics or fewer narcotics than originally planned.  A survey of prescribers in Rhode Island and Connecticut found that those who made use of PDMP data were more likely than non-users to take clinically appropriate action in response to suspected cases of prescription drug abuse or diversion by patients, such as conducting drug screens or referring them to substance abuse treatment.”
Pennsylvania will create a board of overseers to manage the implementation, maintenance, and use of the electronic surveillance system, and plans to phase in the system in a manner that allows providers to experience as little financial or workflow disruption as possible.  Pharmacies and other providers who demonstrate a hardship or do not have reliable internet access will be able to manually submit data to the system, the bill says.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureCare Coordination


