33% of providers think accountable care will tank profits

June 20, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 20, 2014 - A third of healthcare representatives polled by KPMG believe that value-based reimbursement arrangements will have a negative effect on the revenue cycle, with 12% anticipating a drop of 10% or more in reimbursements.  While accountable care initiatives, including increased provider risk-bearing and pay-for-performance arrangements, have been gaining in popularity, not everyone is convinced that the benefits are worth the effort.
Half of respondents are expecting lower operating profits after switching to value-based contracts, while 19% predict a greater reliance on nurse practitioners and physician assistants to meet the burdens of increased population health management.  The focus on chronic diseases will be the most significant change to come out of accountable care, said 28% of providers.
The 240 representatives from health plans, hospitals, physician offices, and pharmaceutical companies believe that health information technology, like EHRs and population health management tools, will have the greatest impact on overall quality of care and patient outcomes as the healthcare system attempts to retool itself to meet the needs of millions of patients with chronic diseases.  Thirty-one percent of participants think health IT will have the biggest effect on care, followed by financial performance (15%), clinical operations (13%), and patient engagement (7%).
Participants were generally optimistic about the financial benefits of EHRs and clinical analytics.  Sophisticated clinical information systems will reduce costs by between five and ten percent, said a third of respondents, while 18% predict a ten to fifteen percent savings and 17% think cost improvements will reach even higher.  However, only 19% think they’re currently using their health IT systems to their full capabilities and delivering meaningful results.
Dig Deeper
Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
Predictive Big Data Analytics Identify High-Risk ED Patients
“Advanced clinical information systems are a large part of making this overhaul sustainable,” said Joseph Kuehn, a partner at KPMG’s healthcare advisory practice. “These newer systems, and the use of data analytics, will lead to greater coordination of care between physicians, hospitals, pharmacies and other providers, reducing what is today the fragmented delivery of care.”
“Clinical information systems have evolved beyond tracking records and transactions to providing deeper analytics about treatment and patient outcomes,” Kuehn added. “Implementation of electronic medical records is one of the initial steps in healthcare information technology, catching errors and duplicate treatments, and providing a vehicle to share information amongst providers. Caregivers can now gain insights into the best course of treatment for patients, who may have very complex medical conditions.”
Tagged Accountable CareChronic Disease ManagementClinical Analytics


