CMS Innovation Awards Promote Population Health Management

May 13, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 13, 2016 - Population health management is taking center stage at the CMS Innovation Center’s Health Care Innovation Awards, an initiative designed to test new payment and delivery models that might hold the key to bringing higher quality healthcare to the maximum number of communities. 
In a new post on the official CMS blog, Principal Deputy Administrator and Chief Medical Officer Dr. Patrick Conway unveiled the second annual series of reports that recap the successes of a number of CMS innovation projects, focusing on everything from big data analytics in oncology care to diabetes prevention.
The award program started in 2012 with 107 cooperative agreements, offering up to $1 billion to organizations that tested population health management, chronic disease management, and cost-cutting programs.  CMS was particularly interested in projects that showed promise for highly complex patients and those with behavioral health or substance abuse issues.
“Overall, these evaluation reports show a wide range of experiences that have resulted in tangible benefits for patients and helped inform CMS in the development of new payment and service delivery models,” Conway said.
“Where data are available, these reports describe preliminary impact estimates on key outcome measures such as hospitalizations and readmissions. A number of awardees showed favorable results on one or more measures of cost, hospitalizations, readmissions, and emergency room visits.”
READ MORE: Epic Systems Integrates Geisinger Population Health Toolkit
Conway highlighted a number of projects that have the potential to improve population health management, clinical decision-making, and care coordination in different segments of the provider community, including the following:
Community Oncology Medical Home
Innovative Oncology Business Solutions, Inc. helped to improve care coordination and disease management for more than 2100 oncology patients in seven community cancer practices across the country through its patient-centered care model.  The delivery model established technical and workflow mechanisms that allowed providers to identify and manage patient needs in real time, made same-day appointments and weekend office hours available to beneficiaries, and provided resources to help patients engage in self-care, manage their pain, and receive caregiver support.
The CMS evaluation of the program revealed that the medical home model produced a “significant reduction” in hospital readmissions and emergency department visits while boosting provider and patient satisfaction due to streamlined processes and greater accessibility.
The High-Risk Children’s Clinic
READ MORE: NH Population Health Management Program Cuts Overdoses by 34%
At the University of Texas Health Science Center in Houston, young Medicaid beneficiaries with highly complex conditions and chronic diseases are receiving extra help to manage their health. 
“Every family in the High-Risk Children’s Clinic has an assigned clinician who involves the parent in all health assessments, empowering parents as experts in their child’s health condition and educating families on exacerbating symptoms,” CMS explains.
By taking a patient-centered approach to care, integrating family caregivers into the care process, and delivering education to patients and their families about symptoms and treatment for their diseases, the Clinic was able to reduce hospital admissions and ED use while producing significant savings.
Medicare Diabetes Prevention Program
Population health management techniques focused on diabetes are becoming increasingly important as the epidemic continues to affect millions of Medicare beneficiaries, and CMS is pouring plenty of resources into combating this life-limiting condition.
READ MORE: LA Housing Program Improves Mental Health, Cuts Hospital Costs
The Diabetes Prevention Program, a round one Health Care Innovation Awards project developed by The National Council of Young Men’s Christian Associations of the United States of America (Y-USA), is poised for expansion after an evaluation proved that the strategy can improve outcomes and cut costs. 
The program includes weekly meetings for high-risk diabetes patients.  The participants learn about optimal strategies for long-term behavioral changes that will help them to control their weight and manage their type-2 diabetes.  Ongoing monthly follow-up meetings helped to reinforce healthy choices.
“The independent CMS Office of the Actuary certified that expansion of the Diabetes Prevention Program would reduce net Medicare spending,” Conway said. “The expansion was also determined to improve the quality of patient care without limiting coverage or benefits.”
The Diabetes Prevention Program is the first preventative care strategy that has become eligible for expansion into the Medicare program at large.
“While the results of the awards are wide-ranging, the evaluation of round one of the Health Care Innovation Awards is still ongoing and future reports will add to the current results,” Conway concluded. “There is still much to learn, and we hope that other public and private entities will continue to invest in initiatives and efforts that improve the health care system in this country.”
Dig Deeper
Breaking Down the Basics of Population Health Management
Can a 4-Question Survey Improve Chronic Disease Management?
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


