Study: Patient navigators pay for themselves in two months

July 01, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 01, 2014 - For many patients with complex needs, the “care continuum” is anything but a smooth, easily understandable stream of seamless coordination between providers.  Even figuring out which provider to contact when a new ailment pops up can be difficult for patients with multiple co-morbidities or current relationships with three or four specialists.  While primary care providers attempt to be the central hub in a complicated web of partners, patients often feel overwhelmed and confused by making multiple appointments or managing an endless stream of tests and prescriptions, potentially landing them back in the hospital when their adherence plummets and their health goes awry.
Patient navigators are a simple solution to these problems, and a new study presented at the Case Management Society of America (CMSA) 2014 Conference and Expo in Cleveland, OH, shows that these skilled professionals can quickly rack up savings, paying their own salaries several times over and reducing Medicare 30-day readmissions by four percent.
The Center for Health Affairs conducted a patient navigation pilot at Lakewood Hospital, part of the Cleveland Clinic system.  During the program, a full-time navigator was enlisted as part of an interdisciplinary care team based in the emergency department, targeting patients who were known to be non-adherent with their care.  Of the 1531 patients who received navigation services, only 3.1% were readmitted.  In addition to lowering the 30-day readmission rate, readmissions among self-pay patients decreased five percent.
And the financial savings were significant.  The patient navigator, who received a salary of $35,000 per year, produced a combined savings of more than $156,000 in just six months, paying for her own efforts almost immediately and contributing much-needed revenue to the hospital after that.
Dig Deeper
Vendors Push Big Data Analytics, but Hospitals Focus on Safety, Security
CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
Brown Gets $1.1M to Study Medicare Post-Discharge Care Quality
The study confirms what many payers, accountable care organizations, and patient-centered medical homes (PCMHs) have already known: care coordinators and patient navigators are an inexpensive and effective pay to ensure that patients understand their responsibilities, take their medications, and attend appointments.  A study conducted in October of 2013 found that 49% of providers intended to hire care coordinators within the year, while payer collaborations with ACOs have already stressed the benefits of training physician assistants and nurses or hiring dedicated patient navigators to help simplify the healthcare system for patients.
  Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationHospital QualityPatient Care


