Foundation Grants $1.35 Mil for Applied Analytics on Substance Abuse

December 22, 2014

By Stephanie Reardon
LAC, TRI, and Truven Health have been given a grant to use applied analytics to improve adolescence wellness, prevention and early interventions under the ACA and Parity Act.
December 22, 2014 - Substance abuse is a problem that can impact all ages, even young people. The good news is that there is help out there for individuals who need it, but the question is how effective is it? According to a press release, Legal Action Center (LAC) is teaming up with Treatment Research Institute (TRI) and Truven Health Analytics (Truven Health) in an effort to answer this question and many others on how to improve adolescence wellness, prevention and early interventions under  the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act (Parity Act).
The Conrad N. Hilton Foundation granted $1.35 million over a period of three years to LAC and its team to help them evaluate the range and implementation of adolescent prevention and early intervention services. The Hilton Foundation’s website states that almost 70 percent of high school seniors have tried alcohol, 50 percent have tried an illegal drug, 40 percent have smoked a cigarette and more than 20 percent have used a prescription drug for a nonmedical purpose.
“We know youth are particularly vulnerable to the harms associated with substance misuse, and if we can help prevent them from using or intervene early it is unlikely they will develop a substance use disorder,” says Steven M. Hilton, President and CEO of the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation. “We believe the project at hand and the partners leading it will continue to demonstrate the significant improvement which evidence-based measures can bring to preventing, treating, and ultimately reducing substance use among adolescents.”
The LAC, TRI and Truven Health’s collaboration will focus on the following objectives for the completion of their project:
document and analyze the status of ACA and Parity implementation
focusing on insurance coverage
evaluate how screening and brief intervention providers offer services
inform and educate purchasers, payers, and other stakeholders of the services mandated by law
ensure that providers understand federal confidentiality rules
Dig Deeper
Artificial Intelligence Tool Passes UK Medical Diagnostics Exam
University of California Forms Big Data, Precision Medicine Network
Gates Foundation Grants $279M to UW Population Health Program
Previously, substance abuse treatment services largely operated as independent facilities outside of the healthcare system.
“Although adolescence represents a vital window in which to provide services for the prevention and mitigation of alcohol and other drug use, the state of substance use prevention, intervention and treatment for adolescents and young adults is inadequate and underfunded.” The press release states. “The majority of young people do not receive the services they need.”
The introduction of the ACA is expected to change the lacking youth substance abuse services.
“Recent legislation has provided the incentive and financing to significantly bolster a more robust public health approach to reducing substance use problems among adolescents,” said Paul Samuels, Director and President of LAC. “By combining the expertise of the scientific, analytic and policy fields, we have an opportunity to identify and expand the promised interventions of the Affordable Care and Parity Acts and truly change the course of addiction for the next generation.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


