Mount Sinai to Build $5M Precision Medicine, Genomics Center

June 26, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 26, 2015 - The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai has received a $5 million charitable donation to establish a center for precision medicine and wellness, which will focus on developing novel strategies for population health management through remote monitoring, genomics, big data analytics, and other technology-driven initiatives.
The gift, from Joshua Harris, co-Founder of Apollo Global Management, and his wife Marjorie, will establish the Harris Center for Precision Wellness within the Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology. 
"I am honored to establish this new center to support groundbreaking research and innovation at the frontier of health and wellness,” Joshua Harris said. “It is an extraordinary opportunity to make a real difference in people’s lives."
"While access to powerful new digital and molecular tools to track and inform healthcare is growing, a science-driven approach is needed to integrate these new technologies into tools and applications that people can trust and use with confidence.”
Dig Deeper
“Big Data Spokes” Tackle Population Health with IoT, Informatics
By 2025, Blockchain, IoT, Machine Learning Will Converge in Healthcare
LG Health, Aspire Launch $300M AI, IoT, Precision Medicine Fund
“A number of research initiatives already underway at the Icahn Institute are focused on driving a greater understanding of health and wellness,” added Eric Schadt, PhD, the Jean C. and James W. Crystal Professor of Genomics at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and Founding Director of the Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology. “The new Harris Center will accelerate this momentum toward developing novel tools and approaches enabling precision wellness.”
The Center will be directed by Joel Dudley, PhD, an Icahn genomics and bioinformatics researcher, and Gregory Stock, PhD, whose background in life science and technology innovation will add to the new organization’s abilities to integrate advanced genomics into the emerging world of precision medicine.
“It’s a real privilege to help catalyze the shift to predictive, proactive healthcare,” said Stock, a Research Professor in the Department of Genetics and Genomic Science. “To realize the promise of nextgen digital healthcare now, a focused effort is essential.”
The center will investigate how popular consumer wellness technologies like wearable devices can find clinical meaning within healthcare’s burgeoning Internet of Things mentality.
“The timing for the center is perfect: key enabling technologies are arising on a broad front, and a shift to more precise and personalized approaches to wellness is taking shape,” Stock added. “Wellness is much more than the absence of disease, and a big-data approach combining information from wearables, lab work-ups and omic panels to better characterize it should be very fruitful in enhancing our health.”
Academic and healthcare organizations have been keen to dive into the world of precision medicine, spurred by President Obama’s January announcement of a national project to collect big data on up to one million patients for research purposes.  Geisinger Health System recently unveiled its Precision Health Center, which will have similar goals as the Icahn project.  Genomics, remote monitoring, telehealth, and patient counseling are on the agenda at Geisinger, which hopes to expand precision medicine services to patients across the country.
At the Harris Center, big data analytics will form a key part of the attempt to understand and synthesize the vast volumes of clinical and patient-generated health data produced by remote monitoring devices and other technologies that collect individualized metrics.
"We are deeply grateful to Mr. Harris for his generosity, vision, and passion,” added Dudley. “His gift will help realize the promise we see in new digital health technologies such as wearable sensors and mobile applications. By drawing upon the core competencies in genomics, multiscale biology, bioinformatics, data science, population health, and clinical trial design at the Icahn Institute, the Harris Center initiatives will further enhance Mount Sinai’s reputation as one of the world's premier innovators in personalized healthcare.”
“It is exciting to have an opportunity to integrate and apply these emerging technologies in a meaningful and scientific way in the pursuit of optimal wellness, vitality, and preventive care.”
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsHealthcare Internet of ThingsMedical ResearchPopulation Health Management


