Why Patient-Reported Outcomes Data is Key to Healthcare Quality

August 29, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 29, 2017 - Considering that the ultimate goal of healthcare is to help patients live high-quality, productive lives, it would seem that patient-reported outcomes data should be the foundation upon which all quality improvement efforts are built. 
Yet integrating patient-generated health data (PGHD) and patient-reported outcomes (PROs) into the everyday workflow is a continual challenge for healthcare organizations, which have struggled to develop the technical and practical skills required to adequately leverage this important source of information.
PROs tend to include basic quality-of-life measurements, including levels of pain and fatigue or mental health concerns, as well as a patient’s experiences with their care and the lifestyle behaviors that may prevent or contribute to the development of acute and chronic diseases.
Surprisingly few organizations routinely use these fundamental patient-reported outcomes data as part of their clinical decision-making processes.  Just one year ago, a Health Catalyst survey found that only 20 percent of hospitals regularly used PROs to gauge the quality of their care.
Respondents who did not integrate PROs into the workflow cited financial concerns, health IT optimization barriers, organizational resistance, and usability issues as some of their top challenges.
READ MORE: Quality Metrics, Big Data Woes Make Value-Based Care Difficult
But the industry is reaching a crucial juncture along its journey towards value-based reform, where any and all data about a patient is a valuable asset that cannot be ignored. 
Both innovative reimbursement models and regulatory frameworks like MACRA are starting to require providers to become much more familiar with how to add patient-generated feedback into their daily workflows – as well as their clinical decision support algorithms.
Getting to a point where patient experience data can join clinical outcomes, claims data, and financial information as part of the routine fodder for big data analytics will be challenging, says the National Quality Forum (NQF) in a new report, and will require a concerted effort across the care continuum to define, standardize, and develop a framework for patient-centered data integration.
A clinic visit is supposed to give patients the chance to share their concerns, symptoms, and experiences before receiving feedback from a provider in the form of a diagnosis, suggestion for treatment, or prescription. 
While many clinicians prioritize – and highly prize – this two-way communication during their consultations, the patient’s voice often fails to resonate as her words are translated into the electronic health record, and is nearly silenced completely by the time that data is transformed into performance metrics and quality benchmarking reports.
READ MORE: Preventing Big Data Pain Points During a Healthcare Encounter
Performance measures, even those intended to support a value-based, patient-centered care environment, are rarely developed with patients themselves in mind, says NQF.  Instead, they have historically been geared towards meeting the financial needs of providers and payers, who have started to negotiate incentives and risk based on reaching certain process thresholds.
But “as pay-for-performance programs continue to gain ground in the public and private sectors, it has never been more important to develop measures that assess healthcare quality in a way that matters to patients,” the report asserts.
“Routine collection of PRO data— and presentation of that information to patients in a form and manner that informs their decision making—can empower patients by encouraging them to learn from the comparative experiences of others. Likewise, patients can make informed healthcare decisions according to the outcomes that are most important to them as individuals.”
Providers and payers can benefit from enhancing the patient voice in their data, as well.  As organizations strive to make their preventive care and population health management plans more effective for bringing down soaring costs, they are in dire need of richer, more comprehensive data about individuals and their complete range of challenges.
A recent focus on the collection and analysis of socioeconomic data and the social determinants of health indicates that the industry is moving towards using its health IT tools to create a more holistic portrait of individuals and their communities. 
READ MORE: Turning Healthcare Big Data into Actionable Clinical Intelligence
PROs that give insight into how these challenges combine with clinical symptoms to impact a person’s quality of life are a vital part of that process, NQF says.
“Armed with this information, providers can shift care plans towards managing symptoms that are more important to a patient’s health-related quality of life and establish realistic expectations based on the patient’s preferences, goals, and health status,” the report explains.
Achieving this goal requires the health system to learn how to collect raw patient-reported outcomes in a standardized manner (PROMs) and then how to translate that standardized data into a performance measure (PRO-PMs) that captures the results most important for improving long-term wellness. 
Source: National Quality Forum
Patients must be intimately involved in the process of developing the data collection tools and performance measures that are geared towards reflecting their health, the organization stresses.
“Consumers are the ultimate stakeholders in quality measurement, offering viewpoints inherently distinct from other stakeholders,” says the report.  “Patients can offer a unique perspective in identifying and prioritizing measurement gaps by sharing their experiences with specific conditions and treatments.”
Many stakeholders, including the National Institutes of Health, PCORI, and the International Consortium for Health Outcomes Measures have already taken this perspective to heart, the brief acknowledges, by developing PROMs and PRO-PMs with the help of patient advocates.
“Without sufficient patient representation, it is impossible to know whether patient feedback is idiosyncratic or representative of the target population,” the report points out.
“In addition, the individual patient voice may be somewhat overwhelmed by the views of clinicians, providers, and others. Ideally, larger population segments could consult in this process to ensure that the outcomes are both meaningful and comprehensive for the population of interest.”
This patient-centered measure development process can continue by taking advantage of the growth of social media and online networks that bring together patients experiencing similar challenges or diseases.
“The proliferation of patient participation in social networks via online platforms creates an opportunity for greater patient engagement in quality improvement,” NQF says. “These forums can provide information and disease education, along with opportunities for patients and caregivers to interact with each other.”
PatientsLikeMe, an online community with more than 500,000 members, allows users to contribute personal health data anonymously for use in research projects related to their individual concerns.
“All patients are asked to report on five cross-cutting or core symptoms—fatigue, pain, insomnia, depressed mood, and anxious mood—along with other symptoms specific to their health conditions,” NQF explains.
“Patients also participate in online forums, where additional perspectives may be collected and analyzed through qualitative data analysis and natural language processing.”
Natural language processing (NLP) has opened up a wealth of new possibilities for collecting and analyzing unstructured data from digital sources.  By identifying meaningful terms or phrases within organically-generated free text, NLP algorithms can turn narratives into standardized elements that are easier to integrate into big data analytics tools.
NQF and PatientsLikeMe tested the potential of unstructured social media data by using conversations about COPD, multiple sclerosis (MS), and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) to sketch out profiles of what mattered most to these patient groups.
Free-text and patient profiling analysis revealed several intriguing highlights, including:
Seventy percent of items included in the standard Clinical COPD Questionnaire (CCQ) were rated “not important” or “a little important” by at least some patients
Over 45 percent of COPD patients reported moderate to severe anxiety, while more than half said that they had moderate to severe insomnia
RA patients stated that they were frustrated with their providers’ inability to understand the emotional burdens of chronic pain and noted challenges interacting with the healthcare system to address their concerns
MS patients expressed significant concerns about the indirect consequences of their condition, including loss of intimacy with partners due to declining health and worries about passing the disease on to their children
Nearly 90 percent of RA patients stated that either their physical or mental health has limited their activities some, most, or all of the time
COPD and RA patients were highly concerned with identifying and managing triggers of their conditions, including environmental factors
RA patients requested much more specific pain-related questionnaires from their providers, including questions that would quantify the mental and emotional health tolls of heightened physical pain
Individuals with COPD also urged enhancements to standardized questionnaires, including metrics to record the frequency and patterns of symptoms, the impact of insomnia and weight gain, and issues related to treatment compliance
The project revealed that patients with a broad array of chronic diseases actually shared many of the same generalized symptoms, such as insomnia, fatigue, pain, anxiety, and depression, which exacerbated the limitations of their clinical conditions.
“Measures that focus on common symptoms may be more valuable than ones that focus on specific diagnoses because they allow comparisons in the patient experience across conditions,” NQF suggests. 
“Determining a suitable subset of common symptoms to measure is not an easy task, but these five general symptoms (fatigue, pain, insomnia, depressed mood, anxious mood) may provide a reasonable starting point to define health-related quality of life via a single patient-reported measure.”
Collecting this data on a regular basis could help providers and patients understand how symptoms and flare-ups change over time or with the seasons, the report says.  Consistent contributions from patients may also minimize recall bias, help individuals accurately chart their progress, and define reasonable expectations for improvement.
“To make a meaningful shift to patient-centeredness, quality measurement needs to focus on patient priorities,” NQF concludes.  “Current methodologies may not leverage real-time data collection, gather experiences from large patient groups, delve into patient concerns, or identify the symptoms that matter most to patients.”
To continue making progress towards developing a truly patient-centered data ecosystem, the healthcare industry should consider leveraging the most important asset they have: patients themselves.
By exploring new methodologies for data collection and analysis, including the information shared by patients in online communities, providers will be better able to meet the quality goals of value-based reimbursement arrangements while delivering tailored, effective care to patients in need of a personalized touch.
Tagged Applied AnalyticsCare QualityHospital QualityNatural Language ProcessingPatient EngagementPatient Generated Health DataPatient OutcomesPatient Satisfaction


