Outsourcing Computer Assisted Coding, CDI Brings 93% of Hospitals Revenue

September 30, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 30, 2015 - The vast majority of larger hospitals that have been outsourcing their clinical documentation improvement (CDI) and computer assisted coding (CAC) activities for nine months ahead of the ICD-10 transition have seen significant gains in revenue, according to the latest poll by Black Book Rankings.  
With the October 1 ICD-10 implementation date mere hours away, providers who are still keeping many of their CDI activities in-house may wish to take inspiration from these hospitals and their million-dollar gains as they face the potential productivity losses and claims denials that might be waiting for them.
"ICD-10 is more than just a coding issue," said Doug Brown, Managing Partner of Black Book. "Clinical documentation improvements, charge capture processes, and medical necessity determinations all will affect revenue and cash flow.”
As the industry braces for what may be a harsh financial blow for unprepared providers, the appeal of outsourcing clinical documentation improvement and coding activities has only increased.  A 2014 report by Research and Markets noted that 71 percent of hospitals planned to secure an external CDI service partner by the third quarter of 2015, and that prediction seems to be extremely close to the current state of affairs.
Dig Deeper
As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
AHIMA 2016: Expect Big Data Governance, MACRA, Value-Based Care
56% of Hospitals Lack Big Data Governance, Analytics Plans
Black Book found that 69 percent of hospitals now outsource clinical documentation auditing, review, and programming, while 11 percent stated that they are “seriously considering” outsourcing end-to-end health information management (HIM) services, computer assisted coding, and clinical documentation improvement tasks to a single vendor in 2016.
"The delays in transitioning to ICD-10 has made many providers fervent proponents of coding and health information management outsourcing," Brown said. "The anticipated investment in coding technology without services that the industry was tracking two years ago has shifted significantly."
“Not everyone is upset with the increase of coding specificity and complexity.  Adding coding expertise via outsourced services has eased the anxiety for many providers as well as using some form of computer assisted coding,” he continued.
Healthcare organizations that have chosen to outsource coding and CDI activities under ICD-9 have reaped measurable rewards.  In addition to the 93 percent of hospitals accruing more than one million dollars in appropriate revenue gains, eighty-five percent of outsourcers have seen quality improvements and increases in their case mix index.
Eighty-four percent of outsourcing hospitals said that their results have exceeded expectations.  More than two-thirds plan to extend current contracts until at least 2018, as chief financial officers start to agree that in-house coding and transcription services might not be core necessities for their organizations.
That doesn’t mean that they do not believe that ICD-10 is an important and challenging mandate to address.  Seventy-percent of CFOs expressed concern about lack of readiness among their payers.  Just under half of participants added that they are worried that third-party payers are less prepared for the ICD-10 switch than hospitals are.  However, only 16 percent of hospitals have completed testing with all their payers, throwing some doubt on how well claims processing systems will work once the industry throws the ICD-10 switch.
Additionally, nearly a quarter of providers said that outsourcing CAC and CDI activities was the only step they have taken to prepare for potential revenue cycle impacts after the ICD-10 transition.  These providers are putting most of their trust in their managed services vendors, which may or may not be a wise strategy.
"Top vendors have the financial stability and commitment to innovation, which means helping improve clinical care and business, not just inserting codes," said Brown.  But healthcare organizations that have not had detailed conversations with their vendors as part of their comprehensive impact assessments may not see the most possible benefit from signing up with a highly-ranked health IT vendor.
As October 1 prepares to whizz by, providers must keep in mind that even specialist coders working for outsourcing service providers might struggle with productivity and accuracy during the initial weeks or months of ICD-10 implementation.  The transition date is merely the start of a long journey for healthcare organizations as they learn to cope with the new reimbursement environment driven by the upgraded code set.
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


