EHR, Health IT Spending Rises as Provider Satisfaction Drops

September 24, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 24, 2015 - No matter how much money healthcare organizations seem to spend on their electronic health record capabilities, provider satisfaction with their abilities to care for patients appears to be continuing its downward trajectory. 
Spending on health IT infrastructure has increased by more than 33 percent since 2010, says a new survey by the Medical Group Management Association (MGMA), but separate research by Geneia indicates that the “joy of medicine” is nowhere to be found.
Multi-specialty practices are spending just over $20,000 per full-time equivalent (FTE) physician each year on EHR technologies, the MGMA Cost and Revenue Survey found, which represents an 11 percent increase in operating costs associated with technology since 2013.   
“As technology continues to evolve, medical practices must likewise also evolve,” said Dr. Halee Fischer-Wright, CEO of MGMA in a press release emailed to journalists. “The way patients ask for and receive care is changing. The increased use of technology can improve the quality of patient care by improving records management, optimizing workflow and meeting HIPAA compliancy requirements.”
While EHR advocates have long been promising that health IT can produce measurable benefits for patient safety, provider productivity, and coordinated care, physicians remain unconvinced that the mandates driving EHR adoption are doing anything except making their lives miserable.
READ MORE: AMA Launches Integrated Healthcare Big Data Analytics Platform
Geneia’s nationwide survey of 400 physicians found an overwhelming dissatisfaction with the process of clinical care.  Eighty-eight percent said that they do not have enough time to develop authentic patient engagement with their clients, while 81 percent stated that they have trouble focusing fully on providing each patient with optimal treatments to meet their complex needs.
In August, the American Medical Association and AmericanEHR Partners found that provider satisfaction with current EHR tools has plummeted to 34 percent.  Physicians complained about decreased efficiency, overwhelming workloads, and unsustainable operating costs. 
Other research has indicated that EHRs may significantly increase the time that physicians spend on documentation, with some physicians reporting that they spend an extra 48 minutes each day to cumbersome EHR use.
“Many things affect physician professional satisfaction, but a common theme is that physicians describe feeling stressed and unhappy when they see barriers preventing them from providing quality care,” said Dr. Mark Friedburg, lead author of an AMA and RAND Corporation study that called EHRs a “source of stress” for the physician community.
“Physicians believe in the benefits of electronic health records, and most do not want to go back to paper charts,” he added.  “But at the same time, they report that electronic systems are deeply problematic in several ways. Physicians are frustrated by systems that force them to do clerical work or distract them from paying close attention to their patients.”
READ MORE: Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
Healthcare organizations have attempted to mitigate the burden on physicians by increasing their use of non-physician providers (NPPs), such as physician assistants and nurse practitioners, MGMA notes.  Physician-owned surgical specialty providers have seen a 44 percent increase in the use of non-physician providers since 2010.  There are now .85 non-physician providers for every physician in these organizations, up from .59 NPPs per physician five years ago.
“NPPs are essential members of our healthcare delivery team,” states Michael Brohawn, Practice Administrator at Orthopaedics East & Sports Medicine Center and MGMA member. “They improve patient care by increasing the efficiency of our physicians which allows them to focus on more acute needs. NPPs also improve patient satisfaction by creating greater access and appointment availability, and they reduce the direct and overhead costs of the practice.”
MGMA has previously touted the benefits of NPPs in urgent care and retail clinic settings, noting that lower-level practitioners can handle the vast majority of basic patient complaints in a quick, cost-effective, and efficient manner.  Under proper supervision, NPPs can provide up to 80 percent of the services of a physician while producing similar levels of patient satisfaction, a 2014 report found. 
The healthcare industry will increasingly rely on mid-level providers to make up shortages of up to 90,000 physicians over the next decade projected by the Association of American Medical Colleges, and these professionals will continue to become more integral to the process of care as providers seek to employ team-based, accountable care strategies for population health management and cost-cutting efforts. 
But adding more staff can only go so far to alleviate the pain points of poorly designed EHR systems that do not allow for easy communication, robust health information exchange, and intuitive workflows that do not inhibit providers from developing meaningful relationships with their patients. 
READ MORE: 70% of Residents Feel Prepared for Population Health Management
With 67 percent of providers stating that they know a colleague likely to quit the profession within the next five years due to frustration and burnout, EHR vendors and rule makers must collaborate with providers to produce and implement technologies that aid the process of patient care instead of creating more problems for end-users.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR UseQuality Of Care


