Primary Care Access Aids Diabetes Chronic Disease Management

May 16, 2016

By Jacqueline LaPointe
May 16, 2016 - As the healthcare industry transitions to value-based care, more providers are putting primary care physicians at the center of chronic disease management programs. However, many physicians wonder how to reach out and provide quality care for safety net patients, who usually have limited access to primary care.
A recent study in the Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine revealed that healthcare outcomes and care continuity for diabetes patients with lower socioeconomic statuses improved when patients were connected to a primary care physician through a safety net clinic.
Approximately 68 percent of participants scheduled an appointment at a federally qualified health center (FQHC) after undergoing a one-on-one educational intervention at the free clinic, which included a referral to a primary care physician at the FQHC.
Out of the group that made an appointment, 47 percent followed through with the first appointment and 38 percent attended at least two appointments over nine months.
Researchers reported improved diabetes management for patients who attended two or more appointments with a primary care physician.
READ MORE: LA Housing Program Improves Mental Health, Cuts Hospital Costs
HbA1c levels decreased by an average 1.2 points after the nine-month intervention period, which indicates better glycemic control. Patients also experienced a significant reduction in BMI with an average 0.5 kg decrease.
“The LINKED study demonstrated improved linkage to FQHCs after expedited referral and one-on-one educational interventions by medical students,” stated the authors of the study. “This intervention described the importance of having a PCP and addressed two major barriers to primary care: lack of health insurance and cost of medical care. In addition, this study demonstrated improved glycemic control among patients using the FQHC as their PCP.”
Diabetes and prediabetes has cost the healthcare almost $500 billion and this number is expected to grow as researchers predict that more than half of adult Americans will develop the chronic disease by 2020.
Major populations that use safety net clinics, such as the uninsured, lower socioeconomic groups, and minority races, account for high rates of diabetes and complications from poor diabetes management. While safety net clinics provide free medical care to these populations, many patients do not receive continuous care that is necessary for comprehensive chronic disease management.
FQHCs, on the other hand, provide regular primary care to underserved populations at a discounted rate. These clinics can connect a safety net patient with a primary care physician based on their ability to pay.
READ MORE: CMS Expands Comprehensive Primary Care Plus to New Regions
Through the study, researchers recruited 68 diabetics at free clinics in Ohio and educated them about the importance of primary care in managing diabetes. The one-on-one counseling included training on continuity of care benefits, reduced wait times and faster scheduling at FQHCs, increased variety of medications, and insurance requirements and subsidized healthcare costs.
Researchers aimed to alleviate common barriers to care access through the counseling session. The study found that the top barriers to getting a primary care physician were lack of health insurance (85.3%), high cost of care (72.1 percent), rarely getting sick enough to see a primary care physician (25 percent), recently moved into the area (22.1 percent), and limited knowledge on where to seek primary care (20.6 percent).
“Specifically, the two most common barriers for our population, lack of health insurance and concerns about cost of care, were addressed directly in our educational interventions,” explained the study. “Our FQHC partners supported statements to the patients that they did not need insurance to be seen at these locations and that the cost of the visits would be assessed on a sliding scale based on ability to pay.”
The study showed that when a specific FQHC had an average fee of $10 versus $30 at the other clinic, patients were more likely to attend two or more appointments.
At the more affordable FQHC, researchers also noted that the care coordinator reached out to the patient more than the other clinic. Each patient at the more affordable FQHC received five phone calls and four mailings whereas the other coordinator only called four times.
READ MORE: Developing Community Partners for Population Health Management
Additionally, researchers reported an increase in medication adherence as participants gained more access to a primary care physician. Patients at a FQHC received more access to care and a choice of more prescriptions compared to the safety net clinics, which managed high patient volumes and experienced challenges to refilling and acquiring prescriptions.
As the study explained, it is crucial to reach out to the safety net population to improve chronic disease management initiatives. Many patients who visit a free clinic are also more likely to end up in the emergency room with a complication from a chronic disease, like diabetes.
Through increased access to primary care continuity, safety net patients could receive the management tools and preventative care they need to better control diabetes and lead an overall healthier and more affordable lifestyle.
Dig Deeper:
• Four Population Health Management Steps for Safety Net Patients
• Examining the Challenges of Medicare Chronic Disease Management
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementPatient Access to CarePrimary Care Services


