Patient Engagement Key to Being Named a “Most Wired” Hospital

July 10, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 10, 2015 - Patient engagement is the name of the game for the majority of top healthcare organizations named to the “Most Wired” Hospital list in 2015.  Using EHRs and patient portals to support chronic disease management and care coordination, the most tech-savvy hospitals in the nation are going above and beyond the baseline to provide personalized, connected care to their patient populations in a secure online environment.
Technology adoption has always been at the center of healthcare’s efforts to meet the tenants of the Triple Aim, which include lower costs, better population health, and more engaged patients, and this year’s crop of Most Wired hospitals and health systems have taken those goals to heart.  While patient portals have generally experienced a cool reception by healthcare providers who struggle to get their patients to view or download their data, the majority of Most Wired facilities have made a concerted effort to bring the internet into the process of care.
Eighty-one percent of these organizations can communicate with patients through emails or portal-based alerts, compared to just 63 percent of hospitals overall.  Just over two-thirds can even incorporate patient-generated health data (PGHD) into a patient’s medical record.  Similar numbers offer chronic disease management tools and education that encourage patients to be proactive about managing their own health.
“At Mercy Health, technology helps us drive better care for our patients and also allows our patients to talk with us directly and take steps to manage their own care,” said Rebecca Sykes, Chief Information Officer at the Ohio-based health system, formally known as Catholic Health Partners. “Our rollout of a bedside tablet featuring the patient portal in our inpatient facilities allows patients access to their own hospital data, such as biographies of their care team, medication interaction information and test results. This latest option for accessing electronic data has improved patient education and satisfaction.”
“Investing in technologies including clinical dashboards, electronic medical records and patient portals was the right thing to do for our patients and that investment is paying off in timely and appropriate care that changes our patients’ lives for the better,” Sykes added.
READ MORE: Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
Mobile devices and mHealth apps are playing a major role in healthcare systems that are meeting the challenges of getting patients to sign up and use communications technologies.  While healthcare organizations attesting to Stage 2 meaningful use are on the hook financially for meeting patient engagement thresholds, patients are less likely to see the value in sitting down at a computer and logging in to a portal system that may not be as intuitive or robust as could be desired.
Allowing patients to use smartphones, tablets, and other mobile devices to access their data is a step in the right direction, said Russell P. Branzell, FCHIME, CHCHIO, President and CEO of CHIME.  “I was surprised to see the high level of usage on mobile devices,” he said. CHIME has partnered with Hospitals & Health Networks (H&HN) to produce the Most Wired rankings.  “We are seeing that mobility is an expectation in all parts of a consumer’s life. They’ll demand that from a patient engagement standpoint.”
“We commend and congratulate this year’s Most Wired hospitals and their CIOs for improving care delivery and outcomes in our nation’s hospitals through their creative and revolutionary uses of technology,” he commented in a press release. “These Most Wired organizations represent excellence in IT leadership on the frontlines of healthcare transformation.” 
True patient engagement requires much more than just a webpage or a mobile app, however.  Top-of-the-class hospitals are developing sophisticated population health management programs, founded in big data analytics, which underpin the process of identifying at-risk patients, reaching out to those with chronic disease management needs, and ensuring care coordination for vulnerable or complex cases. 
At Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford and Stanford Children’s Health, a Most Wired winner in 2015, a long-term clinical analytics and business intelligence project has formed the basis for technological success.   Using big data analytics to integrate and streamline patient care, the health system can react quickly and effectively to the needs of its pediatric population.
READ MORE: Adult Vaccine Project Produces Population Health Best Practices
Lakeland Regional Medical Center in Florida, meanwhile, is using predictive clinical analytics to detect sepsis and prevent 30-day hospital readmissions for heart failure patients, says President and CEO Elaine Thompson in an H&HN profile.  Algorithms comb through massive volumes of EHR data to sniff out downturns in a patient’s condition that may indicate sepsis.  The tool “identifies patients who are becoming septic even before our clinicians can,” she said. 
Advanced EHR use, interoperability, and workflow optimization are critical competencies for hospitals that wish to engage in such high-level patient care strategies, and the vast majority of Most Wired hospitals are using their health IT infrastructure to its fullest potential.  Eighty-four percent of Most Wired organizations can view and exchange data with other facilities with their online portals, while seventy-six percent use portals and EHR technology to exchange results with other facilities that may be using different EHR products, the survey found.
These types of data-driven care innovations, coupled with strong patient privacy and data protections, are helping Most Wired hospitals lead the way into a new era of healthcare: one that leverages big data analytics, risk stratification, and health information exchange side-by-side with the power of patient engagement.  As the healthcare industry continues to unlock the potential of health IT for patient care coordination and population health management, these top organizations are well-positioned to lead the way towards safer, higher quality patient care.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsPatient EngagementPopulation Health Management


