HIM, healthcare analytics staff bringing in big salaries

January 02, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 02, 2014 - Many healthcare organizations might still be questioning the long-term ROI of EHR, analytics, and other HIT investments, but data-driven healthcare is already bringing great rewards for the staff members and managers making it happen.  The 2013 HIMSS Compensation Survey asked1126 health IT professionals about their salaries and bonuses, and found that organizations are offering attractive packages to workers with experience in the technology of the future.
While the rest of the US economy slowly sputters back to life, leaving employees still unsure about the prospect of bonuses and raises, the health IT job sector is thriving under the demands of meaningful use, ICD-10, the Affordable Care Act, and accountable care initiatives demanding enormous changes in the way hospitals and physician practices view their data.  Information technology jobs now make up 2.5% of all healthcare openings, and that number is likely to increase as informatics and advanced EHR needs continue to push the industry forward.
Nearly three quarters of the HIMSS members and colleagues surveyed reported a salary increase over the past year, averaging a respectable 4.16 percent.  Just under half of respondents received a bonus, mostly between 3% and 4% of their salaries.  Disappointingly, men still receive an average of $30,000 more per year than women, and were also favored with larger salary increases by percentage of compensation.
Starting salaries are quite high industry-wide, averaging $113,521, but HIM professionals shouldn’t expect that number to increase very much over the length of their careers unless they plan to move up the responsibility ladder.  Workers with more than 20 years of experience actually brought in slightly less than newcomers, although executive managers take home about twice what a staff member or manager receives.
Dig Deeper
HIM Pros Must Shift from Coding to Health Informatics, Analytics
Laying the Groundwork for Actionable Healthcare Analytics
Illinois to Use Blockchain for Healthcare Credential Management
Organizations that bring in less than $5 million in net revenue, were more likely to pay a higher price for HIM staff than their slightly larger peers, showing that even smaller providers understand the value of healthcare data and are willing to invest in tools to leverage it.  Ambulatory facilities with fewer than ten physicians reported the lowest salaries but the highest raises, while payers were least likely to boost a pay package at the end of the year.
Regional differences in compensation are as expected, with the more expensive areas of New York, New England, and California paying a higher average salary than the South and Midwest.  Corporate positions in integrated delivery networks (IDN) and consulting firms were the most generous employers, with software vendors and stand-alone hospitals coming in slightly lower.  Executive managers could expect a 6.10% increase in salary each year, while lower-level staff members received just more than half of that amount.
  Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data Management


