MI Hospital Association brings clinical analytics to members

July 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 17, 2014 - The Michigan Health and Hospital Association (MHA) Keystone Center is taking a proactive step towards accountable care and quality improvements by bringing clinical analytics to its member organizations.  Instead of relying on individual hospitals to invest in technologies to reduce preventable readmissions and close care gaps, the MHA Keystone Center has partnered with analytics vendor ArborMetrix to analyze its all-payer claims database and identify areas for improvement.
“The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) now considers readmissions analysis for key conditions as a critical component in its value-based payment programs,” said Sam R. Watson, MSA, CPPS, MT (ASCP), senior vice president, Patient Safety & Quality, MHA, and executive director, MHA Keystone Center. “We plan to work with ArborMetrix to analyze readmissions rates for key conditions including pneumonia, heart failure, acute myocardial infarction and joint replacement, and identify patients treated at multiple facilities to more accurately calculate readmission rates and generate savings for many high-cost conditions.”
“This will allow our member hospitals to not only comply with the CMS requirements for value-based payments, but more importantly to understand what they will need to do to improve the quality of care for their patients,” Watson added.
The MHA Keystone Center is a non-profit, funded by organizations such as AHRQ, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, the Michigan Department of Community Health, and the CDC, with a mission to bring patient safety experts to hospitals for collaborative efforts to improve patient safety, reduce medication errors, and raise quality.  In addition to readmissions analytics, the Center will also crunch data on quality metrics for certain high-value conditions that have significant variability in expense and outcomes.  In-hospital mortality, surgical complications, readmissions, and unplanned re-operations will all be examined through the program.
Dig Deeper
EHR Analytics Track C. Diff Patients to Flag Infection Trends
Geisinger, Baylor Granted $3.5M for Patient Safety Learning Lab
Big Data Shows Gender-Based Medical Error, Patient Safety Patterns
“The MHA continues to raise the bar among state healthcare associations through investments in performance measurement analytics to improve the safety and quality of care for patients,” said Brett Furst, CEO of ArborMetrix. “MHA members will find immediate value in this initiative as changing reimbursement models continue to put pressure on their bottom lines.”
  Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsHospital QualityPatient Safety


