Battling bad data to grow market share with big data

September 02, 2014

By Sponsored Content
September 02, 2014 - The healthcare industry is undergoing dramatic changes, including shifting market dynamics, stricter regulatory requirements, and a demanding, consumer-centric marketplace. In the middle of it all is data – and the multiplied power of big data – bringing a host of new capabilities to the table. Healthcare companies are increasingly turning to data and business intelligence solutions to make more strategic decisions and gain competitive advantage.
But this increasing reliance on data has also raised some issues, and bad data is often the culprit behind these issues.
The number one reason for customer relationship management (CRM) failure is bad data. And there’s a lot to keep up with. On average, every 30 minutes 120 business addresses change, 75 phone numbers change, 20 CEOs leave their jobs, and 30 new businesses are formed.
It’s been reported that inaccurate data has a direct impact on the bottom line of 88% of companies, causing the average company to lose 12% of its revenue.
It’s bad timing to run into bad data. With new sources of information and new technologies to evaluate data, healthcare companies are increasingly turning to business intelligence and analytics to increase revenue with targeted service and product offerings. They are also using these solutions to acquire new members and enhance member loyalty through positive customer experiences. And there is a big push to improve data quality to meet regulatory requirements, such as the Affordable Care Act.
READ MORE: Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
All of which depends on good data.
There are few marketing strategies where data doesn’t play a critical role now. For instance, surveys have shown that competitive pricing is most important when choosing a plan — not surprising in an economy where consumers are looking for better care at lower prices. Still, while competitive pricing is important, competing solely on price is a losing game. The healthcare industry must deliver the right products and services to differentiate themselves. To do this, insurers need to thoroughly understand consumers and what they value most in a health plan – they need the data, and it has to be accurate or they risk losing the comparison shopper with a wrong offer or response.
Data is constantly generated as consumers interact with healthcare companies through a multitude of channels, such as email, customer service departments, claims departments, and call centers. Customer information also resides in electronic health records, personal medical records, and billing departments. Much of this data is stored in separate systems and in various formats, making it difficult to efficiently analyze for marketing purposes.
By collecting, cleansing and integrating all this information into a central marketing data mart or warehouse, a clear 360-degree view of the customer can be established. First, though, data must be standardized and cleansed. Data assessments will help identify areas where marketing data can be improved, what types of customer information may be missing, and other data problems that must be corrected.
Create customer segments for targeted marketing
READ MORE: Financial Big Data Analytics Woes Plague Healthcare Providers, Payers
The healthcare industry is rapidly moving from a business-to-business to a business-to-consumer marketplace.  Individuals are researching and purchasing health plan insurance in a more direct way than ever before.
The fact is, though, many consumers feel they do not have enough resources to make an educated decision when it comes to healthcare. A recent Aetna survey revealed that after choosing a retirement plan, consumers rank choosing a health plan as the most difficult decision in their lives, citing three top reasons: the available information is confusing and complicated (88 percent); there is conflicting information (84 percent); and it is difficult to know which plan is right for them (83 percent).
To increase revenue, healthcare companies must target these consumers with clear information and offers, despite knowing that individual consumer attention is costly and time-consuming. The best strategy is to create customer groups, or segments, based on similar characteristics and attributes. Customer segmentation allows healthcare marketers to develop targeted products and deliver cost-effective communications to customers who share similarities.
When creating customer segments, a wide range of customer characteristics must be considered, and behavioral – looking at characteristics such as product usage and frequency of use – is a critical one. Demographics — reviewing factual characteristics, such as age, gender, occupation, and income, is also essential. Another important measurement is psychographics, looking at values, attitudes, lifestyles. e.g., what are your customers’ key values? What are their hobbies and habits?
In any of those cases, there’s a need to drill deep and find customer preferences and profiles that can be trusted. As healthcare companies become more adept at gathering information, they will be more innovative in how they target consumers. And as competition heats up in the changing marketplace, the healthcare industry will have to use traditional segmentation strategies combined with methods to analyze consumer behavior.
READ MORE: Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
By understanding who consumers are and what is driving their healthcare choices, healthcare companies can set themselves apart from the competition.  But they better be sure they are looking at a clean, accurate picture that lets them create on-target relationships that consumers value. In the age of big data, it’s not just important, it’s a matter of survival.
Anders Ekman is president of DataMentors, a full-service data quality, data management and business intelligence provider that leverages proprietary data discovery, reporting and analysis, campaign management, data mining and modeling practices to identify insightful customer sales and marketing directions.
  Tagged Big DataFinancial AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


