$28 Million ONC Grant to Foster Health IT Interoperability

February 04, 2015

By Stephanie Reardon
February 04, 2015 - The Office of the National Coordinator (ONC) for Health Information Technology is funding a $28 million, two-year grant program to support health IT interoperability tools and services that exchange health information, according to a blog post from National Coordinator Karen DeSalvo and Ahmed E. Haque on HealthIT Buzz. This grant comes in addition to $6.4 million funding to train health IT employees and the $1.7 million grant to support population health.
The $28 million grant will be split into 10 to 12 cooperative agreements which will be given to states, territories or entities approved by the state to invest in the State Health Information Exchange Program. Each state will only be allowed to receive one grant.
The goal of this program is to expand health information exchange capacity throughout the healthcare system across states. The program aims to increase connectivity and the flow of information to improve quality of care and interoperability.
The awards follow the release of the ONC’s new health IT interoperability roadmap, which according to a previous report on EHRItelligence.com, compiles information from over the past decade which the ONC considers vital to completing its long-term interoperability plans.
Dig Deeper
Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
Sepsis “Sniffer” Brings Predictive Analytics to Patient Safety
EHR Analytics Track C. Diff Patients to Flag Infection Trends
“Great progress has been made to digitize the care experience, and now it’s time to free up this data so patients and providers can securely access their health information when and where they need it,” said Sylvia Burwell Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services last Friday in response to the interoperability roadmap. ”A successful learning system relies on an interoperable health IT system where information can be collected, shared, and used to improve health, facilitate research, and inform clinical outcomes.”
The ONC will announce the winners of the grants on June 12, 2015.
Providers and hospitals interested in receiving this type of grant from the ONC should visit the website for more information.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHospital Quality


