Harvard, MIT, Hopkins to share in $540M for cancer research

January 06, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 06, 2014 - One of the largest one-time research donations ever made will help six major academic medical institutions discover new methods of treating and preventing cancer.  Johns Hopkins University, Harvard University, MIT, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Stanford University, and the University of Chicago will share in $540 million from the Ludwig Cancer Research organization to develop risk assessments, more accurate screening programs, prevention strategies, and cures for some of the most deadly diseases on the planet.
“Never before has the cancer community had the knowledge and tools to probe so deeply into understanding cancer and discovering new ways to defeat it,” said Ed McDermott, Ludwig trustee and president and CEO of the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research. “More must be done in terms of funding to ensure continued progress in an era of shrinking global resources for research. Providing reliable, long-term support to scientists fosters high impact, innovative research and must remain a priority for the cancer community.”
Unlike many grants that run out after a fixed term and require measurable progress updates at regular intervals, the Ludwig funding, named for shipping magnate Daniel K. Ludwig, is more or less open-ended and allows researchers to pursue a variety of experiments, some of which may have a high failure rate.  Researchers often don’t know what will come from the study of a particular drug or intervention at the outset, but are sometimes limited in their ability to follow promising leads by strict funding rules and a lack of time and manpower.
“With independent, flexible, and long-range funding we can now take an idea based on the best scientific and medical insights, and pursue it further regardless of how long it may take or the size of the eventual patient population it may benefit,” said Dr. George D. Demetri, co-director of Ludwig Center at Harvard. “We also have the freedom to collaborate with leading scientists around the globe, which can lead to new innovations to help cancer patients.”
Dig Deeper
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
EHRs, Value-Based Care Constrain Personalized Medicine Progress
Previous bequests by the Ludwig Foundation, which was founded in 1971 and supports more than 600 researchers at six dedicated labs across the country, have funded research into genomics and DNA mapping of cancers, and fast-tracked research into new therapies for rare and aggressive forms of the disease.
“The additional funding received today will allow the Ludwig Centers to expand and amplify their efforts in perpetuity. Sustained support enables the Centers to continue training the best and the brightest of the next generation of scientists,” said Bert Vogelstein, MD, co-director, Ludwig Center at Johns Hopkins. “Ludwig puts great faith in its scientists by providing ongoing investment that allows them to expedite research and take risks – the only way to make truly breakthrough discoveries.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsClinical DataClinical IntelligenceMedical ResearchPatient Data


