Creating a Strategy to Raise Patient Engagement, Satisfaction

January 12, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 12, 2015 - Healthcare organizations are quickly learning that the idea of a one-and-done patient consult is becoming a thing of the past.  As outcomes-based reimbursement begins to account for more and more of a provider’s financial landscape and picky patients with big deductibles riding on their shoulders are becoming more selective about where and how they seek care, keeping an eye on patient engagement, wellbeing, and satisfaction has never been more important.
How can healthcare providers leverage data analytics and available patient engagement technologies to improve outcomes, succeed in accountable care initiatives, and foster better patient relationships to avoid one-star ratings and scathing reviews?
Conduct an internal assessment
All successful measurement projects require a baseline with which to compare future results.  Conducting an internal assessment of patient engagement levels – which are likely to be low, if recent research is accurate – and how patients feel about the quality of the care they are receiving is an important step for gathering the data necessary to make improvements.  Are patients unaware of the availability of a patient portal, or is computer literacy a barrier for part of the population?  Do patients feel intimidated by speaking to their physician and withhold critical information?  Is there a language barrier, or are they simply unaware of what questions they should ask about their own health?
And don’t just ask the patients.  Staff members are the key to patient satisfaction, and they may have gripes, issues, or suggestions of their own.  Is the EHR interface so frustrating that they forget to listen to a patient while typing?  Do they wish they could have access to more information about a patient’s chronic disease status or high-risk issues when in the consult room?  How can data analytics technologies, clinical dashboards, or other technologies help?
READ MORE: National Health IT Week Brings Celebration, Educational Events
Most high-performing organizations conduct patient-facing surveys regularly, the Medical Group Management Association (MGMA) found in a 2013 study. “Successful groups actively and regularly solicit feedback from their patients,” said Kenneth T. Hertz, FACMPE, Principal, MGMA Health Care Consulting Group. “Patient satisfaction surveys give practices an immense amount of detail on their patients’ experience, and that feedback is particularly useful as medical groups seek to improve and elevate the care they provide.”
Understand available health IT options
After establishing the organization’s pressing needs and prioritizing issues that must be addressed, providers can start to seek available technologies that can help to solve their problems.  EHR users typically have a great deal of data on hand that can feed into population health management software and produce risk stratification metrics, identify chronic disease patients, and promote preventative services.
“We have so much clinical and operational data now that sometimes our organizational leaders – and certainly nurses at the bedside – are not sure how to use the data to drive improvement and where to focus their efforts,” said Christina Dempsey, Chief Nursing Officer at Press Ganey.  “Just having the data is not enough.  You have to actually use the data to drive improvement. You have to be sure that data, not anecdotes, are what is driving the decisions.  With electronic health records, we just have so much more data than we’ve ever had before.”
Selecting a product that best meets the specific focus of an organization’s patient engagement framework can be challenging.  Hundreds of vendors are attempting to capitalize on the growing interest in population health management and patient-centered care as the market for these products grows rapidly.  Providers should begin the quest by distinguishing between patient-facing technologies, such as mHealth apps and portals that provide access to personal health information, appointment setting, and prescription refill capabilities, and technologies that are primarily for the benefit of clinicians, such as risk stratification software or clinical quality measurement.
READ MORE: Cost is a Primary Driver of Medication Non-Adherence Rates
Both work in tandem to promote a better patient experience.  Patients receiving care in a patient-centered medical home or accountable care environment, both of which are heavily driven by EHR use, data analytics, and population health management technologies, report higher satisfaction rates and better overall health.  Plus, they incur fewer costs to the healthcare system as a whole.  Organizations with limited budgets should seek to strike the right balance between investing in back-end analytics and front-end engagement opportunities that provide a rich and functional experience for patients.
Creatively encourage patient engagement
Even after making the investment and rolling out a patient portal, providers may have a fight on their hands to get patients to understand, access, and stick with the technology.  This may require providers to perform an intense level of outreach and education, depending on the patient population’s level of health literacy and computer know-how.
“We have two areas in Phoenix where we’ve got a high Medicare population, so we have had a little bit of a struggle there,” explained Christine Steigerwald, Senior Director of HIMS Operations at Banner Health, a 25-hospital health system in Arizona.  “We have some patients thinking that they were violating HIPAA rules by even getting into their own records, or they thought that by doing accessing the portal, they were actually allowing CMS to get their information.  So we have really worked on consumer awareness and education, and we stress how to maintain and how to manipulate their own information and why that’s so important.”
“Some patients are hard to persuade, so we got very creative with bringing them into a small office, offering them the opportunity to get a $10.00 gas card if they would spend the time with us,” she added.
READ MORE: CMS Reform Model Fosters Care Coordination, Population Health
Providers can start on a very basic level: making sure they speak to their patients about available portals or other features before they walk out the door.
Be a good listener and remain flexible
Above all, providers who wish to ensure high marks for patient satisfaction must be able to listen to what their patients are telling them.  While the sting of a two-star rating on Yelp or Healthgrades may turn physicians off the idea of being agreeable just to pander to vocal social media denizens, more patients are paying closer attention to how an organization is rated online as they choose where to get their care.  Long wait times, unfriendly receptionists, and difficulty with scheduling are among the top issues that may result in a thumbs-down, while the ability to provide an accurate diagnosis, coupled with good listening skills, will produce a positive evaluation.
Providers should be willing to evaluate negative comments for their accuracy and truthfulness, and assess any changes that should be made if the same themes or disappointments arise regularly.  But patients are generally willing to be generous with the comments that they make, several surveys have found, and are eager to recognize their providers for their efforts.
“From our findings, it appears that doctors tend to get much better reviews than hotels, restaurants and retail businesses,” said Ron Harman King, CEO of Vanguard Communications, which conducted a poll indicating that more than half of physicians receive four-star ratings or higher. “While some doctors indisputably suffer from unjust online comments, our snapshot of American healthcare providers indicates doctors in general enjoy widespread respect and gratitude from patients.”
Tagged Accountable CarePatient EngagementPopulation Health Management


