Mayo Clinic launches “Better” apps for remote care

April 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 17, 2014 - Telehealth has just gotten a whole lot “Better” with a new mobile app service launched by the world-famous Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.  The remote care suite will allow customers to access a symptom checker and medical knowledge bank for free, but will add around-the-clock access to personal care assistants, nurses, and other specialists for a monthly fee.
“We have been challenged by our board and our president and CEO to think about how we can make Mayo Clinic knowledge available to anyone, anywhere, any time. And this is a very nice, novel way for us to reach out in that direction,” said Dr. Paul Limburg, medical director of Mayo’s Global Business Solutions group, to the StarTribune. “Mayo has recognized that really for 150 years we have provided…the highest quality health care. But we’re also trying to bring knowledge out to the population in a more scalable way. So we talk about not only health care, but also health information and health guidance.”
The “Better” apps, developed in association with Silicon Valley investment firm The Social+Capital Partnership, are the second piece of Mayo’s attempts to branch out into more than just traditional healthcare.  Earlier this year, Mayo launched Ambient Clinical Analytics, which hopes to bring clinical decision support and clinical analytics tools to the bedside and into the pockets of providers.
The company’s initial offerings include a “sepsis sniffer” to detect the insidious disease early enough to provide adequate treatment, a clinical dashboard that filters EHR data into a useable form for clinicians to make better decisions, and the Ambient Warning and Response Evaluation (AWARE) system, which is being tested in a pilot program funded by CMS.
Dig Deeper
Clinical Decision Support May Boost ID of Chronic Kidney Disease
Unfiltered EHR Data Overloads Physicians, Perpetuates Burnout
Machine Learning to Fuel “Collective Intelligence” of Human Dx Project
The new app suite is intended to build customer loyalty to the expanding Mayo brand.  The free programs allow consumers to input symptoms, go through a checklist of applicable conditions, and provide suggestions about the possible underlying causes.  The app will also recommend a visit to a primary care provider if the symptoms seem like something to worry about. With the optional $49.99 per month package, consumers can also talk to a live nurse or share their data online, develop a care plan with a specialist, or make appointments.
Future plans for the suite include the integration of patient-provided data to help create a more integrated experience, says Geoffrey Clapp, a telemedicine expert who has been working with the program.  “What you won’t see us do is build medical devices,” he said. “But what you’ll see us do is integrate with medical devices. So blood glucose meters, blood pressure cuffs, even EKGs and things like that” will be able to connect to the system and input data that can aid providers in assembling a complete portrait of a patient’s health.
Tagged Big DataClinical Decision SupportmHealthPopulation Health ManagementRemote MonitoringTelehealthTelemedicine


