Researchers study falls among the elderly with data analytics

February 05, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 05, 2014 - Researchers from New Mexico State University (NMSU) and LifeSupport Medical are helping elderly patients avoid painful falls by assessing their risk with a mobile data lab.  Using a pressure pad that collects information on balance and gait, the partnership hopes to identify risk factors and reduce the number of falls that can result in broken bones, decreased mobility, and poor quality of life.
One third of elderly patients are likely to experience a fall each year, which can result in traumatic brain injury, hip and spine fractures, and lacerations.  Falls are the leading cause of fatal and non-fatal injuries among older adults, says the CDC.  In 2010, more than 21,700 seniors died from unintentional fall injuries.  The prevention of falls, especially during inpatient care, has become a major hospital quality metric that has attracted attention from quality improvement programs and patient safety advocates.
Falls now outrank car crashes as the number one cause of spinal cord injury in the United States, says a new study published in the Journal of Neurotrauma last month, making up 41.5% of injuries compared to 35.5% from car accidents.  Seniors with spinal cord injuries are four times more likely to die in the ED from the trauma compared to young patients, and six times more likely to die once admitted to the hospital.  Falls accounted for 30% of all injuries among the elderly in 2009, which is an increase of 7% over just two years prior.
“We have demonstrated how costly traumatic spinal cord injury is and how lethal and disabling it can be among older people,” said study co-leader Dr. Shalini Selvarajah, a postdoctoral surgical research fellow at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “It’s an area that is ripe for prevention.”
Dig Deeper
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
In New Mexico, the public-private partnership studies risk factors by using a pressure-sensitive pad equipped with sensors and 3D motion-tracking cameras.  The Mobile Fall-Risk Prevention Laboratory is currently on a nation-wide tour, and can be set up in half an hour to measure the way patients walk and provide an assessment of their likelihood of falls.  The lab is based on research performed by Bob Wood, head of the Department of Human Performance, Dance and Recreation in the NMSU College of Education.
“Screening data helps us explore health disparities to identify the risks for different groups,” Wood said. “For example, more affluent individuals have a lot of home hazards, but less affluent people have more risks associated with poor vision care. We look at the demographics and try to focus on things that might be problematic for each individual.”
The partnership not only provides data for medical research, but also helps LifeSupport Medical develop commercial offerings based on the results gathered from such tests. “The NMSU partnership is our most valued affiliation,” said Anthony Dohrmann, CEO of LifeSupport Medical. “NMSU has elevated our offerings to the aging and chronically ill to epic new proportions. Because of the NMSU partnership we have opened a clinical research division with the focus of preventing medical emergencies and injuries before they happen.”
“[LifeSupport] provides opportunities for research for us through outreach efforts, including recruiting seniors to participate in our falls studies, they provide equipment so we can enhance the work we are doing in our labs and they also are collecting data according to the specifications we have developed so we can increase the power of our findings and the generalizability of the work we are doing,” Wood added.
Tagged Applied AnalyticsPatient CarePatient SafetyPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


