FDA Accelerates Precision Medicine with Rare Disease Funding

March 14, 2016

By Jacqueline LaPointe
March 14, 2016 - The FDA has announced the start of a new grant program focused on studying the history and life cycle of rare diseases in an effort to improve the health system’s understanding of uncommon conditions
The announcement was made on Rare Disease Day 2016 to signify the importance of precision medicine in diagnosing and treating rare diseases.
In the United States, a rare disease is defined as affecting fewer than 200,000 individuals.  Seven thousand known rare diseases affect an estimated 30 million Americans.
But researchers and physicians lack the resources for developing appropriate diagnostic tools and therapies for rare disease patients.  Investigators have limited clinical research available to form a foundation for future explorations of rare diseases and their effect on patients.
Dig Deeper
FHIR Can Move Genomics from Prediction to Precision Medicine
CMS Proposes Coverage for Next-Gen Precision Medicine Test
Machine Learning Identifies Ovarian Cancer with 91% Accuracy
“Think about it as the course a disease takes – from the time of its onset, progressing through its pre-symptomatic phase and clinical stages, to the end of the disease. Insight into a disease’s natural history can help lead to better, more well-designed trials that can accelerate the development of life-saving diagnostics and therapeutics,” Katherine Needleman, Ph.D., and Gumei Lui, MD, PhD said in the statement.
Precision medicine may hold the key for creating a network of information on rare diseases to help researchers design personalized treatments for patients.
The Obama Administration introduced the Precision Medicine Initiative in January 2015.  It focuses on more personalized care for patients by accounting for an individual’s genes, lifestyle, and environments.  For precision medicine to be successful, the initiative calls for major innovations in big data analytics and interoperability.
The FDA hopes that its new grant program will encourage researchers to develop the groundwork for a shared network of information that can be used to create personalized care.
Funded studies will help to identify genotypic and phenotypic subpopulations, define natural histories, and create clinical outcomes, biomarkers, and diagnostics.  To achieve this, studies can be retrospective, prospective, or be a survey study.
The two funding levels are based on prospective or retrospective studies.  The first grant is for a prospective study on natural history studies with clinical examination of affected individuals for a maximum of $400,000 in total costs for up to five years.  The second grant is a maximum of $150,000 in total costs per year for up to two years for retrospective or survey studies.
The studies will help researchers to identify specific biomarkers that can predict how well a treatment will work.
As with other aspects of the Precision Medicine Initiative, patient participation in rare disease research is critical because so few individuals are afflicted by the disease. Patients with rare diseases oftentimes need to use patient advocacy groups to fight for their cause.  Many of these groups simply lack the funding to develop tools to help these patients received personalized care.
“We hope that this new Orphan Products Natural History Grants Program will help build the important foundation necessary to accelerate the development of life-saving diagnostic and treatments for the many rare disease patients who need them,” Needleman and Liu said in the statement.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPersonalized MedicinePrecision Medicine


