ACO success depends on data integration, analytics

October 07, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 07, 2013 - The decision to join an accountable care organization (ACO) may start out as a financial one, but anyone who takes the plunge quickly finds out that revenue is only half the battle.  ACOs depend on a comprehensive examination of a provider’s target population, which in turn depends on having a robust data collection, analysis, and reporting infrastructure that can provide the insights to turn shared risk into shared rewards.
ACOs try to bring together the many disparate parts of the care continuum to accomplish one single goal: help every patient access every healthcare provider she needs without duplicated tests or unnecessary services that inflate the overall cost of her care.  If every member of the ACO works effectively together, then all the members are rewarded financially for keeping patients healthy, happy, and out of the hospital.
But in order to see which provider is succeeding or which is falling behind, ACOs rely entirely on data.  Commercial ACOs use over 300 metrics to rate their members, according to MedeAnalytics, with ambulatory care and utilization of supplies and services making up more than half of the data points.   Preventative care activities, such as screenings for breast cancer and colorectal cancer as well as testing for complications from diabetes, ranked highly on the checklist.  This data is routinely collected by EHRs, giving providers a valuable tool for identifying patients who are not being asked the right questions.
The trick to the analytics necessary for an ACO is ensuring that all of that data is not bound by silos that prevent providers from seeing the bigger picture.  “Lots of people have data, but they don’t always have it integrated, and can’t always turn it into actionable information,” explained Joseph M. Taylor, VP and ACO Practice Leader at FluidEdge Consulting to Healthcare Informatics.  “And in care management, they have a lot of talented people, but don’t have their organizations architected to support care management, or the tools needed to execute it. And in terms of documentation, even if you’re doing all the right stuff, will someone pay you for it, if you can’t document it correctly? Those are where the pain points are.”
Dig Deeper
Big Data Analytics Link Economic Wellness to Population Health
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
“There are four critical success factors here,” Taylor continued.  “The first is to incorporate, which means data integration. The second one is understanding, which is analytics and actionable information. The third one is act, which is care management, which is care coordination, and related activities. And the fourth is report, which is being able to demonstrate results.”  Without addressing all four points on the ACO compass, providers won’t have any idea which way to turn when trying to close care gaps among their target patients.
By leveraging patient data in pursuit of accountable care, providers can understand not only where their patients need work on medication compliance or lifestyle habits, but also where they need to improve to provide the care they’re financially liable for.  “It’s a fair question for that provider to say, ‘Okay, I’m happy to do a great job if you help me know what it is I’m supposed to be doing.  If you want me to score well on the test, at least let me know what subject I’m studying,’” says Keith Dunleavy, MD, President and CEO of Inovalon.
“So the analytics say, ‘There’s a lot going on with this member.  There are some things that are going well, but some things that need attention.  These are those things.’  It helps the provider be aware of issues with the patient that, under the burden of time pressures that the physician often has, it helps the physician understand what the targets and goals are.  That’s a key issue.”
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsApplied AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceEHR AnalyticsHealthcare Data AnalyticsPatient DataPopulation Health Management


