Smokers given free meds, calls are 70% more likely to quit

August 22, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 22, 2014 - Cigarette smokers who were offered a free supply of nicotine replacement medications and a series of automated phone calls were 70% more likely to be non-smokers after six months than patients who were required to take more initiative on their own, found a Massachusetts General Hospital study published in JAMAthis week.  The patients, who were already motivated to quit smoking, adhered to nicotine cessation programs for a longer period of time when receiving a “sustained care” program, which can be implemented for as little as $1000 per smoker.
“Health care systems need effective models to manage chronic diseases like tobacco dependence across transitions in care. Hospitalizations provide opportunities for smokers to quit, but research suggests that hospital-delivered interventions are effective only if treatment continues after discharge,” write Nancy A. Rigotti, MD, and a team of researchers from Boston-based healthcare organizations.  “The major challenge for hospitals in providing evidence-based care is identifying how to sustain tobacco treatment after discharge.”
The researchers enrolled nearly 400 patients who expressed a desire to quit tobacco use, providing standard care to half and an enhanced treatment protocol to the others.  Standard care included post-discharge recommendations for a nicotine replacement medication, including a note in the patient’s EHR directing the primary care physician to prescribe the drug, and the number of a free hotline to call for emotional support.
The enhanced plan consisted of a free, 30-day supply of nicotine replacement medication that could be refilled twice to provide for 90 days of treatment, plus a series of automated phot calls at regular intervals that provided advice and support.  Smokers could also access a live counselor for additional support through the system.
Dig Deeper
How to Get Started with a Population Health Management Program
Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
Patients receiving the sustained care program used more counseling and stayed with the medication program for longer than those on the standard care track, the study found.  After six months, 26% of sustained care patients were validated as tobacco-free compared to just 15% of the standard care cohort.  “Sixty-one percent of smokers in the sustained care group used medication for 8 weeks or more of a 12-week course, whereas nearly half (48%) of smokers in the standard care group used medication for only 2 weeks or less,” the study explains. “The longer treatment duration likely contributed to the 71% higher quit rate in the sustained care group.”
While the study is limited by the fact that it only included patients who expressed an independent desire to quit the use of tobacco products, the results of the project, and the low cost associated with providing medications and follow-up calls once the infrastructure is in place, may indicate that such efforts hold promise for motivated patients.  The authors are replicated the study at multiple care sites to expand their data and hopefully achieve similarly positive results.
Tagged Accountable CareChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


