Radiology data brings business intelligence to accountable care

October 14, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 14, 2014 - In a world where pay-for-performance contracts and accountable care arrangements now dictate how many hospitals are getting paid, the more data available to a healthcare organization, the better their business decisions can be.  Understanding how an organization’s utilization of resources compares to other providers in their geographic region or size range can help pinpoint poor treatment decisions, improve quality, and trim costs.  The latest Radiology Patient Care (RPC) Index from vRad, a free collection of imaging data from a large swath of US healthcare organizations, is one way that providers can compare themselves to their peers and reduce wasted testing.
As health plans shift the financial burden of care onto patients, out-of-pocket costs make expensive imaging tests a risky proposition for families.  CT scans that show no significant findings can frustrate patients who are stuck with thousands of dollars to pay, but they can also mean fewer reimbursements for the providers who order the tests.  While an abundance of caution is better than missing a diagnosis, clinical analytics and quality data from similar organizations can highlight whether or not a specific hospital is erring one way or the other.
“Using analytics to better measure, benchmark and prove overall healthcare value is a complex undertaking,” said Philip Hampton, Vice President, Lovelace Health System in New Mexico, in a press release. “You must know what to measure, how to measure it, and what benchmark goals to choose. For example, when tackling issues like imaging appropriateness, you can’t compare your data to a critical access hospital with 25 beds in Vermont if you are a Level 1 trauma center in Los Angeles. Radiology analytics demand context if you are going to make better decisions for better alignment with hospital partners around quality, service levels and performance.”
Dig Deeper
Can Point-of-Care Analytics Change the Healthcare Equation?
Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
Providers Struggle with Time, Tools for Revenue Cycle Analytics
The RPC data shows, for example, that hospitals in the Northeast are significantly more likely to order CT scans in the emergency department than hospitals in other regions.  Emergency department CT scans make up 36% of all imaging tests in Northeast hospitals, compared to 21% in the South, 18% in the Midwest, and just 10% in Western states.  Small hospitals are half as likely as medium or large facilities to order a CT for an emergency department patient, but are just as likely as other hospitals to discover a positive finding for a head CT or abdominal/pelvic imaging study.
New York has the highest volume of ED CTs in the country, and is fifth in the nation for positive findings.  Washington State, meanwhile, ranks second in the nation for percentage of positive CT scans, yet is 35th in the country for volume.  Louisiana is 37th for positive findings and 12th in the nation for volume.  Despite the wide difference in rankings, the margin between the highest and lowest ranking states is relatively slim, indicating that physicians are generally in agreement about what constitutes a reason for ordering tests.
“There are many complex moving parts when it comes to improving the value and performance of healthcare,” said Benjamin W. Strong, MD, ABIM, ABR, vRad Chief Medical Officer. “Having normalized, findings-based data allows [hospital executives] to have fact-based discussions with physicians and administrators using objective insight on how imaging volumes and findings statistics compare to facilities just like theirs.  Radiology must be the one transforming data into analytics – and effectively shining the spotlight on our use of imaging. If we don’t do it, someone else will.”
Tagged Accountable CareClinical AnalyticsRevenue Cycle Management


