176M May Be Covered by Accountable Care Organizations by 2020

December 30, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 30, 2015 - Accountable care organizations (ACOs) have quickly become one of the industry’s most successful strategies for enlisting providers in value-based reimbursement arrangements, and have rapidly brought significant changes to population health management and the delivery of coordinated care.  
With their focus on health information exchange, team-based care delivery, expanded patient access, and measured quality improvements, the ACO offers providers the opportunity to earn financial bonuses for making healthcare better for everyone involved.
While some participants have seen only modest financial success with certain available options, ACOs are likely to keep gaining in popularity, predicts a new report by Leavitt Partners.  If current trends hold, anywhere between 105 and 176 million patients may be covered under an accountable care organization by the end of the decade, the paper states. 
“Value-based care delivery models designed to improve the financial and quality outcomes of health care organizations have been the focus of the health care discussion for several years,” the report states.
“The number of ACOs has grown rapidly over the past few years, increasing from 157 in March of 2012 to 782 in December of 2015.”
READ MORE: MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
“Similarly, the number of lives covered by ACOs has increased from an estimated 7 million in March of 2012 to 23 million in December of 2015,” the study continues.
“ACOs have been formed by a variety of providers, including hospital systems, physician groups, and integrated delivery systems and include commercial payers as well as Medicare and Medicaid.”
While CMS and other federal groups have promoted the ACO as the primary vehicle for the transition to pay-for-performance reimbursement, a bright future for the framework in its current form may not be quite as certain as rule makers would like.
Buffeted by criticism over poorly designed metrics and a few very public failures among the Pioneer ACO set, the accountable care organization may be seeing some major changes in the next few years – especially as the healthcare industry shifts away from the EHR Incentive Programs and towards the more holistic Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS), which rolls up technology adoption and financial incentives for value-based care into one larger program.
Despite the fact that provider uncertainty about their financial future is at an all-time high, the ACO is likely to remain a significant driver of change in the reimbursement landscape, Leavitt Partners maintains.  The strategy combines four major pillars of potential success in the murky quagmire of healthcare reform, which may propel providers towards increased adoption:
READ MORE: ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
An altruistic outlook on providing higher quality patient care.  Not only do ACOs stress the importance of the three components of the Triple Aim – better patient engagement, better outcomes, and lower costs – but they usually provide a clear and measured methodology for achieving these goals.  The belief that ACOs can and do deliver improved outcomes and a better patient experience may drive increased adoption over the next few years.
An opportunity to ease into risk-based contracting.  Many ACOs allow providers to dabble in receiving financial bonuses for quality improvements for several years before they are required to accept down-side risk for failures.  This approach encourages providers to make immediate changes that impact patient care while preparing them slowly for the financial burdens of true risk-sharing.
The ability to grow market share.  ACOs strengthen the ties between local business partners by encouraging patients to stay within a tight network of providers that can coordinate their care with the help of health information exchange technologies.  As providers band together into more cohesive, cooperative groups, they may see their market share increase.
A chance to outmaneuver competitors.  From a business perspective, accountable care organizations offer myriad benefits to smaller providers.  In addition to keeping more patients within the network, ACOs may be able to leverage their size and position in the marketplace to gain an advantage in contract negotiations with payers and other partners.  ACOs may also offer new opportunities for revenue that a traditional fee-for-service arrangement could not provide.
The federal government has been pouring plenty of resources into ensuring that healthcare organizations understand how the accountable care organization ecosystem can help them remain competitive in a rapidly changing reimbursement world. 
READ MORE: How to Get Started with a Population Health Management Program
CMS has repeatedly stated that ACOs are the key to achieving its long-term cost-cutting goals, and has lavished praise on participants in its Medicare Shared Savings Program (MSSP) framework for their quality improvements and financial achievements.
This generalized approval of the direction that ACOs are headed will be important for increasing the number of patients covered under ACO arrangements, the report states.  If CMS and private payers continue the current level of support for value-based reimbursement and quality improvement programs, approximately 105 million patients may be receiving ACO care by 2020.
However, with MIPS looming on the horizon and anxiety over provider and patient satisfaction reaching a fever pitch, it’s very possible that ACOs will see even more success as they cement their position as a centerpiece in the fight to rescue healthcare from runaway costs, physician shortages, and the burdens of chronic disease.
If ACOs receive strong, consistent, and “enthusiastic” support from the federal government, private payers, providers, EHR developers, and other healthcare stakeholders, the number of ACOs might expand even more significantly, the report states. 
Up to 176 million patients may be receiving care under an accountable care arrangement by the end of the decade, representing a 600 percent increase from the 23 million patients in ACOs at the moment.
The report admits that it would take an extremely powerful and concerted effort across the care continuum to reach more than half of the US population by 2020, and that it is more likely that the first scenario will come to pass.
Still, having more than 100 million patients in accountable care organizations would be a major triumph for ACO advocates.  The development of such a large-scale ACO environment may also mean that health information exchange, interoperability, and care coordination efforts have started to pay off, which would be good news for health IT buffs, as well.
Whether or not the ACO truly becomes the powerhouse of population health management remains to be seen, but healthcare stakeholders do not appear to be slackening in their support of accountable care any time soon.  As the EHR Incentive Programs trundle towards their conclusion and MIPS positions itself to take their place, the healthcare industry will no doubt continue to experience massive, disruptive, but exciting change.
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


