WUSTL granted $8M for genetic, patient data analytics

April 08, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 08, 2014 - Washington University of St. Louis School of Medicine has been granted $8 million from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute to fund a large-scale research project examining genetic and lifestyle data from a varied patient population.  The research team will review data from more than 30 other studies on genomics, cardiovascular disease, and lifestyle factors to establish relationships between genetic factors, daily patient choices, and heart diseases.
“We have compelling preliminary data that highlight the potential of these investigations,” said lead researcher Professor Dabeeru Rao. “We found, for example, several novel genes associated with high blood pressure that were not previously known until the interactions with alcohol consumption or education were brought in.”  Rao notes that the study is “unprecedented” in its size and approach, tabulating data from more than 300,000 patients of multi-ethnic descent.
Rao and his team hope to identify the underlying biological and genetic pathways that lead to some populations developing cardiovascular disease at higher rates.  While genomic research has previous identified DNA variants associated with higher cholesterol or abnormal blood pressure, Rao says that these factors do not influence ultimate outcomes sufficiently to be satisfied with current research.
The field of genomics research has produced promising leads for patients suffering from breast cancer and brought personalized medicine much closer to being a reality as DNA data is integrated into EHRs and daily clinical workflows.  Funding for genetic research has been plentiful as providers, pharmaceutical companies, and academic institutions seek ways to identify diseases earlier and find more effective treatments for cancers and hereditary diseases.  The Stanford Center for Clinical and Translational Sciences recently received $43.5 million to further its investigations into disease diagnostics, while Geisinger Health System has procured $1.4 million to further its genetic research programs.
Dig Deeper
CMS Proposes Coverage for Next-Gen Precision Medicine Test
Cancer Moonshot Report Showcases Precision Medicine Progress
ONC Highlights Its Precision Medicine Initiative Collaborations
Rao says that his study will be “”the first systematic, well-powered, large consortium-level effort for systematically evaluating gene-lifestyle interactions,” while Professor Ingrid Borecki, another principle investigator involved in the project, added that the research will offer a “nontraditional mode of scientific cooperation that continues to provide greater insight into the genetic architecture of cardiovascular disease than we have been able to achieve in the past.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig DataClinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceGenomicsMedical Research


