CDC: Only 16% of providers screen patients for alcohol use

January 08, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 08, 2014 - While plenty of people spend the weekend at a local pub with nothing more than a mild hangover and some embarrassing text messages to show for it, millions of others take the Saturday night party a little too far.  Binge drinking, defined as more than four or five drinks within three hours, affects at least 38 million adults in the United States, and long-term excessive alcohol use can lead to serious and costly health problems such as heart and liver disease, cancer, and harm to pregnant women and their fetuses.  Despite the fact that alcohol overuse costs the country at least $224 billion in economic losses a year and an estimated 88,000 deaths per annum, few providers routinely screen patients for signs of binge drinking and discuss healthier lifestyle behaviors during routine care.
During a study, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) found that only one in six patients have discussed alcohol habits with their care team despite the fact that counseling by a provider has the potential to reduce alcohol consumption by 25% in over-indulging patients.  Only one in four binge drinkers have had the discussion, and a scant 17% of pregnant women have talked about the role of alcohol in their lives while they are expecting.  In Kansas, the screening rate was as low as 8.7% of patients, while Washington, DC saw one in four patients receiving a screening, the highest rate in the nation.
“Brief intervention sessions were effective in significantly reducing weekly alcohol consumption (by 3.6 fewer drinks/week for adults) and binge level episodes, and increasing adherence to recommended drinking limits (achieved by 11% more participants),” says the CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) on the subject.  “Further, effects can last for years and show improvement in health-care utilization outcomes including fewer hospital days and lower costs.”
Dig Deeper
ICD-10 Allows Non-Physician Documentation of Social Determinants
AHIMA Offers Clinical Documentation Tips for Opioid Abuse
Stress, Depression Negatively Impact Chronic Disease Management
The CDC recommends that providers incorporate alcohol screenings into visits to primary care physicians, the emergency department, trauma centers, and OB/GYN facilities.  While the initiation of alcohol and substance abuse treatment is one of the clinical quality measures (CQMs) included in Stage 2 of Meaningful Use, the CDC reminds providers that relatively few patients who indulge in more than the recommended amounts of alcohol truly qualify as alcoholics in need of specialized care.  Providers should develop screening protocols as part of their daily workflows in order to maximize the benefits achievable by discussing the issue with patients in a routine way.
  Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementHealth Information ManagementmHealth and Population HealthPopulation Health Management


