Big pharma opens up big data for clinical trials, analytics

July 23, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 23, 2014 - Something strange is happening in the board rooms and laboratories of some of the biggest pharmaceutical companies in the world: the doors of the famously secretive and profit-hungry corporations are slowly cracking open, allowing clinical researchers and big data analysts to peek inside at the enormous wealth of information hidden for so long.  Following in the footsteps of healthcare providers who have started to realize that data must be shared openly in order for the industry as a whole to advance, some pharmaceutical companies are allowing an unprecedented look at their clinical trials and patient information in order to further research and improve clinical outcomes.
Big pharma companies typically keep their cards close to the vest because it costs so much to develop a drug throughout its lifetime.  From discovery to prescription pad, a typical medication can take twelve years and $4 billion to shepherd through its lifecycle, a significant investment that would be hard to recoup if everyone had the secret to the newest blockbuster pill, especially since only ten percent of drugs ever make it to market.
But some companies, like GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), may have found a better way.  What if opening up their vast treasure trove of data to researchers, more and more of whom now have computing power to rival the best of them, could speed the process of bringing products to fruition while flagging dead ends and patient safety risks more quickly and efficiently?   With billions of dollars on the line each year and a growing thirst for transparency turning data hoarders into the bad guys, it seems like it’s worth a try.
“GSK’s ultimate goal is to see a broad system develop where the clinical research community can access data from trials conducted by different organizations,” said Patrick Vallance, President of Pharmaceuticals Research and Development at GlaxoSmithKlein said in 2012 following a BMJ announcement that the scientific journal would only publish papers where there was a commitment to make the data used in the studies public to other researchers.  “We want to work with others to make this happen.”
Dig Deeper
Next-Generation Genomics, Precision Medicine to Top $100B
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
NIH to Bring Precision Medicine Data Collection to Patient Homes
GSK and several other pharmaceutical manufacturers, including Bayer, Sanofi, Roche, and Lilly, have collaborated to upload patient-level data collected by clinical trials to a web portal, where researchers can submit proposals and request anonymized data from certain studies.
But big data researchers aren’t limited to accessing data through the pharmaceutical companies themselves.  Data delivery services and collaborations like those between Optum and the Mayo Clinic have cropped up to make data access easier.  Optum provides analytics tools and data to allow researchers to explore information on 149 million UnitedHealth Group patients, while Mayo contributes clinical data on around 5 million patients to facilitate research.
Meanwhile, Thomson Reuters recently announced the availability of data on more than 180,000 clinical trials through its Cortellis Clinical Trials Intelligence program, including data on drugs, biologics, biomarkers, diagnostics, and medical devices.  The data can be accessed through analytics tools within the Cortellis platform or through an API embedded in other software applications, widening the possibilities for clinical integration and research substantially.
“We are proud to have reached this significant industry milestone within the first year of releasing Cortellis Clinical Trials Intelligence,” said Jon Brett-Harris, managing director, Thomson Reuters IP & Science. “This rapid development is a reflection of our continued commitment to provide the best available information to support the pharmaceutical industry in driving successful clinical trials.”
For researchers seeking robust and timely access to clinical trial and patient data that was previously locked up tight, these developments mark the beginning of a long-awaited revolution.  While pharmaceutical companies remain for-profit entities with a hawkish eye on their stock prices, which may preclude true and universal transparency, giving researchers a glimpse into their inner workings might be able to do something that everyone agrees is a good thing: produce faster trials, better drugs, and longer and healthier lives for the patients whose health and welfare are ultimately on the line.
  Tagged Big DataClinical AnalyticsMedical Research


