Revenue Cycle Big Data Analytics Bring Insights and Savings

December 03, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 03, 2015 - When it comes to big data analytics in the healthcare arena, gaining clinical insights is only half the battle.  Provider organizations attempting to deliver the highest quality care available often operate on razor-thin financial margins that leave resources spread thin and initiatives carefully balanced between the black and the red.
In order to ensure that front-line providers continue to have access to the administrative support they need to treat patients well, financial managers must develop nimble, responsive, and comprehensive revenue cycle management techniques that identify trouble spots quickly and deliver information in a meaningful way to the right people.
At Cardiac Surgery Associates (CSA) in Illinois, the task of building a robust and integrated revenue cycle analytics program falls to Chief Operating Officer John Barakat. 
By breaking down data siloes and gathering dozens of data streams into a single manageable thread for reporting and analysis, Barakat has helped the surgical cardiac and peripheral vascular healthcare provider achieve deeper insights and a quick return on its investment.
“In my first few months at CSA, I observed that we lacked the ability to quickly and accurately analyze the overall performance of our hospital programs at which we performed surgical and management services,” Barakat told HealthITAnalytics.com in an interview. 
READ MORE: Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
“This was mainly due to the plethora of independent data systems that were used for reporting but lacked the ability to crosslink to each other.  Consequently, data was downloaded and combined in Excel a majority of the time.  This process was inefficient and lacked consistency.”

CSA’s surgeons treat patients at a number of local hospitals, each of which requests a business plan and ongoing reporting about the surgeons’ performance against industry benchmarks and regional peers. 
“Hypothetically, if we start a program that has a million dollars in total expenses and we collect $500,000 in professional fees, our hope is that the hospital we are partnering with could/would subsidize CSA for the other $500,000,” Barakat explained.
“In order for this partnership to work, we have to provide reports to our hospital partners that show our billing performance, and prove that we’re doing a good job billing and collecting for our professional services.  By increasing productivity and billing accurately and efficiently, we will likely collect more dollars, and in turn the less the hospital has to pay to subsidize the program.  The less they pay, the happier they are, of course.”
But the revenue cycle reporting system in place, which required Barakat to produce new reports every time an administrator made an ad hoc request, was not equipped to handle the complex data analytics requirements of such a multi-faceted business structure.
“These reports were cumbersome and time-consuming to generate,” he said. “In order for our organizational leaders to evaluate the employed surgeons in the group, they needed to see several indicators such as productivity, compensation, billing performance, and the overall profitability of their respective hospital programs.”
READ MORE: Providers Struggle with Time, Tools for Revenue Cycle Analytics
After researching the available vendor options, CSA chose to work with Information Builders and their WebFOCUS product, which helps Barakat create standardized reports that provide his colleagues with the information they need for actionable decision-making.

“The consistency of the standardized reporting was very important to us,” he said.  “Once you create the reports, the look and the feel of the document is the same every time, which is really important for anyone analyzing data.  The physicians interpret the data much faster now, because they see the same categories in the same places every time.”
As with many new initiatives, however, getting the go-ahead from the board wasn’t as easy as Barakat may have liked.  “The partners really didn't see the value in it at first,” he admitted. “They were okay with the Excel-based reports that we were providing to them, and they really didn't see how more advanced analytics were going to change the overall financial performance of the corporation.”
“But now that we have it and they're receiving data a lot faster, they’re very pleased.  Executives don’t always care about what happens on the back end.  As long as it’s done and they like what’s happening, they’re pretty happy to leave the rest of it up to the ghosts in the background, pulling the strings.”
“They do know that the service is better, and they do know the data they're getting is of higher quality and more consistent, but they leave the rest of it pretty much up to me.”
The executive team may not be deeply invested in the details of how their reports are created, but they are certainly very interested in what those reports are saying – especially when the news is so good.
READ MORE: Financial Big Data Analytics Woes Plague Healthcare Providers, Payers
“We have noticed an almost 300 percent increase in our profit margin,” Barakat said. “Obviously, that’s not only because we’ve improved our reporting – it definitely helps, but we have also done a lot of other things in the organization to increase revenue and decrease expenses.  But better tools help me do that.”
“Being able to run a report and look at my expenses in detail so I can understand exactly where I have to make improvements helps me address these issues and mitigate losses that I couldn't manage quickly enough beforehand.”
A clear revenue cycle management strategy, coupled with the right big data analytics tools to let Barakat view the situation in detail, has taken the organization from a reactive stance into a proactive one, he said.

“I don't want to wait six months and run an Excel report only because somebody asked me to, then find out that there’s a problem we should have fixed weeks ago,” said Barakat.

“An ad hoc request could come in for a particular hospital, so I’d run an income statement and suddenly say, ‘Oh boy, salaries need to be adjusted, because they are a little bit above the industry benchmark, or our rent is a little too high, or the revenue we generated there wasn't enough; the cap that's built into our contract is really hurting us.  We are looking at a potential loss of about $100,000 – and by the way, we’ve already sustained $80,000 of it.’”
“That’s not acceptable, and it’s not something you want to deal with too late.  You want to know in January, not in October. So now I can constantly monitor my reports without having to manually create them by downloading data from five different systems into Excel.  I know right away if I have to address a financial situation that needs attention.”
In most healthcare organizations, managing multiple programs, reporting requirements, and data streams is the norm.  Information may be siloed in separate systems, requiring analysts to create inventive workarounds, and everything from data integrity challenges to poorly synced reporting cycles can pose serious problems for providers who just want a clear view of what is happening within their own walls.
“When you are managing multiple programs the number one priority is being able to find reliable information,” Barakat stated. “If it takes me too long to find information, that makes it very difficult to accomplish anything – especially when you're getting phone calls from three different hospitals in the same day requesting things from you.  You need to meet their needs, because they're your customer.”
His advice to providers to may be struggling with juggling competing demands is to place an emphasis on satisfying customers’ needs with speed and accuracy.  “I think they really value that,” he said. “I don't wait a week to get somebody a report. With the tools I have, it doesn’t take me that long.”
To accomplish that goal, providers should invest in building a robust and reliable IT infrastructure that eliminates data siloes and streamlines reporting processes.
“You need to invest in a database, whatever type of database you want, whether it's a hard database like SQL or a cloud-based repository,” suggests Barakat. “We went with a hardwire database because we are big, but we're not so big that I needed to do a cloud-based system and I didn't want the recurring fee of cloud-based storage. That was just my personal preference.”
In the end, “healthcare is really just like any other business,” he said.  “We may be treating patients, but from the business perspective, we still have customers to serve.  You have to meet their needs, and if you don’t, they’ll get rid of you pretty quickly.”
“They won't work with somebody who's not giving them what they need, whether it's performance from the surgeon or even performance from administration, because there are so many different things that have to be done to maintain a program at a hospital: privileging of the doctors, privileging and training of the mid-level providers, the management of the office and office staff, billing performance, and last but not least my team here.”
“When hospital administrators call our main office, our job is to make sure they are happy with the services we provide.  Having the right tools allows me to accomplish that.”
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceRevenue Cycle AnalyticsRevenue Cycle Management


