AHA revamps LDL guidelines with predictive risk stratification

November 13, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 13, 2013 - The first new guidelines for cholesterol care in more than a decade prominently feature a heart disease and stroke risk calculator and risk stratification for certain groups of patients.  Stressing preventative care by recommending a wider use of statins for more patients, the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association are leveraging population health management techniques and predictive analytic risk scores to tackle the world’s leading cause of death.
The new recommendations eliminate the target goals for lowering cholesterol in patients with high LDL levels, and instead focus on the methods behind healthier hearts, including a renewed focus on diet and exercise and a wider application of higher doses of statins.  “The new guideline uses the highest quality scientific evidence to focus treatment of blood cholesterol on those likely to benefit most,” said Neil J. Stone, MD, Bonow professor of medicine at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. “This guideline represents a departure from previous guidelines because it doesn’t focus on specific target levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, commonly known as LDL, or ‘bad cholesterol,’ although the definition of optimal LDL cholesterol has not changed. Instead, it focuses on defining groups for whom LDL lowering is proven to be most beneficial.”
In order to reach the patients who would benefit most from new treatments, the panel in charge of developing the guidelines highlighted four high-risk groups: patients with cardiovascular disease, patients with an LDL level of 190 mg/dL or higher, Type 2 diabetics between 40 and 75 years old, and patients with an estimated 10-year risk of cardiovascular disease of 7.5% or higher who are between 40 and 75 years of age as determined by a risk calculator created by the experts.  At the time this article was published, the calculator was undergoing revision prompted by user input.
The rules represent a significant shift towards individualized medicine, placing a focus on using a specific patient’s clinical data to develop a treatment plan that will work best for him or her.  By providing physicians with a targeted cohort of patients likely to benefit from certain therapies, the panel is embracing the tenants of population health management on an immense scale.  The change means that approximately 33 million Americans now qualify for statin use, more than doubling the current rate.
Dig Deeper
Machine Learning Identifies Ovarian Cancer with 91% Accuracy
Precision Medicine Aids 20% Drop in Pediatric Cancer Deaths
AMA, Patient Groups Join “All of Us” Precision Medicine Outreach
“The likely impact of the recommendations is that more people who would benefit from statins are going to be on them, while fewer people who wouldn’t benefit from statins are going to be on them,” Stone said, adding that he expects the risk calculator to benefit physicians immediately in their clinical practice by giving them more information than just a cholesterol number to develop the right strategy for their patients.  “The cornerstone of all guidelines dealing with cholesterol is a healthy lifestyle,” Stone stressed. “That is particularly important in the young, because preventing high cholesterol later in life is the first and best thing someone can do to remain heart-healthy.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceMedical ResearchPopulation Health ManagementPredictive Analytics


