How can expanding internet access address health disparities?

July 23, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 23, 2014 - Overcoming the divide between patients who have regular broadband internet access and those who do not could be a key factor in decreasing health disparities and improving overall health literacy, argues a Harvard professor of public health.  Despite the prevalence of smartphones and personal computers, patients with lower socioeconomic standing, who are also prone to increased levels of chronic disease, lack access to one of the basic tools of modern life and may not be able to make the same healthy choices as higher income peers.
“If you are in a higher socioeconomic position, you are more likely to know about and better understand health risk factors, and to have the capacity to act on this information,” said K. “Vish” Viswanath, professor of health communication at Harvard School of Public Health (HSPH), in a July 15, 2014 “Hot Topics” lecture. “If we are serious about addressing health inequalities, we cannot afford to ignore the poor.  There are opportunities to engage with them if you provide the right context.”
Lower income patients, non-native English speakers, and people with disabilities are exposed to more advertising from tobacco and fast food companies while lacking the ability to do online research about health conditions, access mHealth tools that are becoming increasingly critical to the way patients track and maintain their health, or communicate with providers online.  They may also be more likely to live in areas called “food deserts,” where access to fresh groceries and healthy meal choices are limited or non-existent.
Forty-four percent of Americans don’t yet have access to smartphones, found a 2013 Pew Internet poll, with elderly, low-income and less educated residents significantly less likely to own the technology. “It’s great if we can create apps for people who have plenty of resources, but what about those without smartphones?” said Veenu Aulakh, Executive Director of the Center for Care Innovations in San Francisco, California. “We don’t want these people to be left behind.”
Dig Deeper
HHS Targets Population Health, Big Data with $36M in Grants
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
Predictive Analytics, Accountable Care Markets to See Rapid Growth
Expanding internet access – and treating internet use as a right for all people – may help to close the gap between patients who can take charge of their own personal health management and those who lack the tools to do so, Viswanath says.  Providing subsidies to allow low-income users to maintain regular internet access could make a significant difference in how often they can get online, he adds.
During a study he conducted in January, Viswanath found that patients given internet access for the first time were most likely to visit local hospital websites, especially those that included patient portals where they could refill prescriptions, make appointments, and contact physicians.
“Prior relationships and trust are key to reaching this population,” Viswanath said. “Health messages could be promoted through the websites of organizations that are familiar to them such as local hospitals and community health centers. But these sites must be convenient and comfortable for them to use.”
“The poor like to go to websites that encourage user participation and engagement—so-called social media, so any attempt to reach them with information should harness these platforms. Companies that manufacture unhealthy foods and tobacco are already doing that.”
Tagged Accountable CarePatient EngagementPopulation Health ManagementSafety Net Patients


