AHIMA 2016: Expect Big Data Governance, MACRA, Value-Based Care

October 14, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 14, 2016 - The final rule for the MACRA Quality Payment Program isn’t the only thing that’s going to be generating buzz across the healthcare industry next week.  As the 88th annual AHIMA Convention and Exhibition kicks off, thousands of healthcare professionals from across the industry will converge on Baltimore to share big data best practices with their eager peers.
With its typical good timing – last year the conference wrapped up the day before the ICD-10 implementation deadline – the AHIMA convention is likely to be full of vigorous conversation about the role of MACRA and its associated big data changes will play in the future of value-based care.
HealthITAnalytics.com will be joining the throngs of executives, clinicians, health information managers, and big data experts looking for tips on how to navigate the dynamic value-based care environment and discuss the challenges – and opportunities – of the MACRA era.
This year’s meeting will put data governance front and center as AHIMA leaders explore the theme of “inspiring big thinking to launch our future.” 
Dig Deeper
AHIMA: Information Governance is Key for Trusted Healthcare Analytics
Health Data Analytics a “Competitive Differentiator” for Payers
AHIMA Offers Clinical Documentation Tips for Opioid Abuse
“Healthcare professionals will gather at the AHIMA Convention for interactive presentations, panel discussions and open forums to discuss how information should be governed for healthcare purposes,” the convention website says.
“Today’s healthcare system requires the use of information in for many purposes: to inform decisions on patient treatment plans, staffing levels, quality reporting, reimbursement, financial planning, and population health management. Information is shared not only with a healthcare system, but now also across the healthcare ecosystem and with patients.”
ONC Chief Medical Information Officer Dr. Andrew Gettinger will open the show with an update on federal activities in 2016, and it is likely that the revolutionary QPP will receive a mention or two.
Implementing effective information governance and charting the future of the healthcare industry is on the agenda for the second day of general session.
Attendees will be able to glean insights from speakers including Jennifer Covich Bordenick, CEO of the eHealth Initiative, Dr. Susan Turney from the Marshfield Clinic Health System, Katherine Lusk, Chief HIM and Data Exchange Officer from Children’s Health System of Texas, and Sally Beahan, Director of HIM at UW Medicine.
Attendees will also have a dizzying array of educational sessions to choose from, including such topics as clinical documentation improvement, data privacy and security, population health management, succeeding with value-based care and bundled payments, patient risk stratification, and patient matching.
Information governance and data integrity underpin all of these issues, AHIMA has always argued, and providers are still falling short on the basics of collecting timely, accurate, complete, detailed, and relevant data.
A January survey from the organization found that half of all HIM pros still struggle with making sure that providers are accessing the right chart for the right patient.  Duplicate medical records remain a serious patient safety issue, and only 47 percent of respondents to the poll said their organization conducts quality assurance protocols when creating patient records.
Healthcare organizations may not be able to progress to meaningful population health management and big data analytics if they cannot even ensure that their patients are receiving treatments meant for the right individual, the survey warned, echoing themes that will feature prominently in many of the information governance and clinical documentation improvement sessions.
Moving providers beyond the fundamental problems of data generation will be essential for success with emerging issues tied to the value-based ecosystem, such as risk adjustment, population health management, and the patient privacy concerns related to sharing data more freely across the care continuum.
The Quality Payment Program will bring all of these concepts and competencies together under one regulatory roof, making it more important than ever for providers to understand how to apply big data to the quality improvement and population health management tasks that will define the future of healthcare.
Don’t forget to follow HealthITAnalytics on Twitter for real-time updates from the show floor!
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernancePopulation Health ManagementValue Based Care


