Cigarette Smoking Rates Closer to Healthy People 2020 Goals

December 08, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Fewer Americans are smoking cigarettes, the CDC says, as the nation moves closer to Health People 2020 goals.
December 08, 2014 - The cigarette smoking rates of US adults have dropped significantly enough to come within sight of the Healthy People 2020 goals to cut cigarette use to less than 12% of the population.  While anti-tobacco efforts still have some way to go in order to reach that target, the proportion of American adults who smoke cigarettes has dropped from 20.9% in 2005 to 17.8% in 2013, while the proportion of daily smokers decreased from 16.9% to 13.7% in the most current data.
As cigarette smoking is one of the leading causes of lung cancer and chronic diseases such as emphysema and heart disease, the beginnings of a general shift away from tobacco use represents a notable victory for overall population health management.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report on the nation’s smoking habits does not address the use of smokeless tobacco products such as chewing tobacco, nor does it take into account the sharp rise in popularity of e-cigarettes, which have attracted a number of younger consumers.  While the effects of the vapor-based contraptions, which often include nicotine-infused solutions, have not yet been studied in depth by the medical community, e-cigarettes are generally perceived – or at least marketed – to be less of a health risk than the conventional option.
Smoking rates among the surveyed population vary significantly by demographics.  Citizens who are male, younger, identify as multiracial or Native American/Native Alaskan, identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual, have less education, and have lower incomes are more likely to be smokers.  Respondents who live in the South or Midwest are also more likely to smoke, as are respondents who reported a physical or mental disability or limitation.
Dig Deeper
Three Finalists Named for $100,000 Population Health Prize
Kaiser Permanente Program Reduces Cardiovascular Disease Risks
Top 5 Collaborative Tasks for Population Management, Public Health
Specifically, males are 5% more likely to be smokers than females.  Twenty percent of adults aged 25 to 44 years were smokers, as compared to just 8.8 percent of patients 65 or older.  Adults whose highest level of education is the General Education Development (GED) certificate smoked at a rate of 41.4 percent compared to only 5.6 percent of adults with graduate degrees.  Twenty-nine percent of respondents who lived below the federal poverty line identified as smokers, but just 16.2 percent of those with higher incomes indicated the same.
“The 50th anniversary Surgeon General’s report on the health consequences of smoking concluded that disease and death from tobacco use are overwhelmingly caused by cigarettes and other combusted products, and that rapid elimination of their use will dramatically reduce this burden,” the CDC report says. “Although the decline in overall cigarette smoking prevalence during 2005–2013 from 20.9% to 17.8% is encouraging, approximately 42.1 million adults still smoke cigarettes; this underscores the need for continued implementation of evidence-based interventions.”
Some of the recommended interventions, outlined by the World Health Organization, include raising the prices of tobacco products, expanding and enforcing smoke-free laws, and developing patient education that clearly shows the devastating impact of cigarettes on health and wellness.  The Surgeon General’s recommendations also include reducing the nicotine content of cigarettes to non-addictive levels and imposing more severe sales restrictions on the local level, the report says.
Tagged Population HealthPopulation Health Management


