Accountable care leader Geisinger announces CEO departure

July 29, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 29, 2014 - Geisinger Health System, one of the nation’s shining beacons of integrated healthcare delivery, is undergoing some significant changes as it announces the departure of Dr. Glenn Steele Jr., President and CEO in 2015.  Steele has served as Geisinger’s leader since 2001, overseeing a rapid expansion in staff and a thorough commitment to care coordination, medical research, population health management, and its EHR and clinical analytics infrastructure.  The health system will continue its innovative growth with a new partnership with Aetna: a five-year contract that allows all Aetna members to receive in-network access to Geisinger facilities.
“Leading Geisinger is one of the best opportunities I could ever imagine,” said Steele. “With the commitment and dedication of our employees, Geisinger has done well and is making a difference in evolving value-based health care across the country. I am fully committed to moving full speed ahead as we recruit and welcome a new CEO.”
Under Steele’s leadership, the health system grew from 7500 employees to nearly 21000 staff members at close to 60 locations who focus on patient engagement, chronic disease management, and quality improvements throughout Pennsylvania.  “You should be providing value for every one of your patients,” said Dave Jolley, Vice President for Public Affairs when describing Steele’s philosophy. “As opposed to a fee for service paid for a volume of work, we‘re starting to see it turn to be paid more for the value of the work you perform.”
In May, Geisinger joined with New Jersey-based AtlantiCare Health System to explore methods of bringing that accountable care philosophy to scale. “Over time, we will improve the patient experience and health status of the community, reduce the total cost of care while improving quality and efficiency, transform care from episodic to value focused, and provide meaningful coordination across all health care [settings],” Steele said while announcing the collaboration.
Dig Deeper
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
Geisinger has also led the way in expanding patient access to personal health information, taking part in one of the first Open Notes programs and focusing resources on growing health information exchange to improve coordination of care.  In conjunction with the Keystone Beacon Community, Geisinger developed a software package that allows nursing homes, home health agencies, and other long-term care providers exchange health information without having adopted an EHR.
Steele will relinquish his position in June of 2015, and the health system has already started to search internally and nationally for his replacement.  He has served as a health adviser for the United States Congressional Budget Office and as chairman of the American Board of Surgery, and has authored or co-authored more than 480 papers and articles within the scientific community.
Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationPopulation Health Management


