HIMSS releases HIE toolkit for public health agencies

July 02, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 02, 2014 - In order to help public health organizations better understand the uses and benefits of health information exchanges (HIEs), HIMSS has released its Public Health and HIE Toolkit.  The collection of resources is designed to encourage public health departments to connect with community providers as healthcare organizations strive to meet the data exchange and public health reporting requirements of Stage 2 meaningful use while boosting data-driven population health management programs.
“The first priority of local health departments is to make it easier for people to be healthy and safe. Health information technology increases the capacity of local health departments to be able to do that. The new Health Information Exchange (HIE) Toolkit for Public Health will allow local health departments to automatically receive and analyze electronic health data to identify diseases that affect our communities, and it will enable local health departments to improve public health surveillance and response to those diseases,” said Roland Gamache, PhD, MBA, Senior Director of Informatics at the National Association of County and City Health Officials (NACCHO), which has collaborated with HIMSS on the project.
“Health information exchange is a critical technology for public health. Healthcare providers and health departments exchange tens of millions of reports and documents yearly. These protect communities from disease outbreaks, prevent crippling disabilities in newborns, protect against identity fraud, and assess the health of communities and the effectiveness of population health programs,” added Seth Foldy, MD, MPH, FAAFP, who authored the materials. “The toolkit acknowledges current flux in HIE technology and business models, and is designed to help health departments make sensible business decisions over time.”
With a plethora of public and private HIEs available to public health departments, and no official accreditation or standardization programs currently in use to help rank or explain the different systems, providers and local agencies are in need of tools to help them understand the landscape, HIMSS says, and make cost-effective decisions that will further public health management.  The Toolkit contains information about how a public health department should use an HIE membership and how to assess the value of participation.
Dig Deeper
Epic Systems EHR Brings Care Coordination to Walgreens Retail Clinics
AMA Renews Commitment to Public Health after Election Results
CVS Retail Clinics, VA Partner for Care Coordination, Access
“The Public Health & HIE Toolkit includes clear and concise organization and core information. The tools included in it will assist our department in analyzing HIE opportunities for risks and benefits; preparing recommendations for policy and resource allocation and developing needed data use agreements. I anticipate consulting the toolkit over the next few years, as we move toward health information exchange in our community,” said Kathy Cook, information and fiscal manager, Lincoln-Lancaster County Health Department.
Access the full HIE Toolkit here.
Tagged Health Information ExchangePopulation Health ManagementPublic Health


