What problems can be solved with healthcare analytics?

September 25, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 25, 2013 - When healthcare organizations think about investing in information technology, they’re looking for results, not just a touch-screen way of doing the same paper-based tasks.  Analytics can provide those results, and organizations have been rapidly building programs to target some of the biggest pain points in the industry.  Cathy Gorman-Klug, RN, MSN and director of quality service lines at Nuance, sat down with HealthITAnalytics to discuss some of the problems analytics are attempting to solve in the ever-changing landscape of healthcare reform.
“Honestly, I think it’s a very exciting time in the world of data analytics,” she said.  “While many organizations have been using some form of analytics for some time, we’re starting to see an uptick in people talking about advanced analytics and big data right now.”
As of late, some of the largest areas of focus when it comes to data and analytics have been:
1. Readmissions
Physician Perceptions of Patient Engagement Affect Consumer Use
How a Shortage of 90K Physicians May Impact Healthcare Reform
Information Blocking? Prove It First, Say EHR Vendors to ONC
Medication management market to be worth $1.62B by 2019
AMA, CDC Launch Joint Type 2 Diabetes Prevention Effort
Devin Jopp Resigns as President and CEO of WEDI
Cherokees Sue McKesson, CVS, Wal-Mart for Lax Opioid Monitoring
Accountable Care Organizations Still Face Interoperability Woes
Natural Language Processing, Voice Tools Offer Solutions to EHR Woes
Can the Patient-Centered Medical Home Help Achieve Savings?
PwC: Artificial Intelligence, IoT, Population Health Top 2018 Trends
Can upfront cancer care payment cut costs by 34 percent?
AMA to Connect Physicians with Health IT, Big Data Companies
Big Data Analytics Vendors and Products: Who’s Using What?
Better patient safety needs clinical analytics, cultural change
Will Meaningful Use Disgruntlement Delay Precision Medicine?
FDA Seeks Patient Engagement for Clinical Trials, Precision Medicine
Can Senate Health Data Interoperability Proposals Improve HIE?
How are providers using EHRs, HIE for population health?
Women on oral birth control are 35% more likely to develop MS
UMass to Study Use of Wearables in Chronic Disease Management
HHS gives $35.7 million to patient-centered medical homes
EHR, Health IT Spending Rises as Provider Satisfaction Drops
Shifting Healthcare Business Intelligence Market Offers Opportunities
EHR analytics: Hypertension 4 times more likely in obese kids
HIM, Healthcare Big Data Analytics Skills Increase in Demand
Growing Healthcare Opportunities for the Internet of Things
Should Population Health Management Participation Be Mandatory?
HHS Targets Population Health, Big Data with $36M in Grants
Revenue Cycle Big Data Analytics Bring Insights and Savings
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
87M historical patient records digitized for data analytics
Preventable Hospital Readmissions Fall Dramatically Across US
Harvard, Cancer Orgs Unite to Accelerate Precision Medicine Research
Big Data, Predictive Analytics among Top Reader Topics of 2014
Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence Gain Healthcare Momentum
HIMSS Analytics: CAC Tools Slated for Growth Ahead of ICD-10
HIMSS Recognizes EHR Products for Immunization Data Integration
Did Early Interoperability Focus Help Cerner Beat Epic at DOD?
4 Basics to Know about the Role of FHIR in Interoperability
CIOs: FHIR Has Potential, Blockchain Overhyped in Healthcare
$3M Grant Will Aid EHR Data Management, Chronic Pain Research
84% of EHR Replacements Focus on Big Data, Population Health
Trainee informaticists must face myriad EHRs, analytics tools
Google DeepMind: Blockchain Can Ensure Health Data Integrity
What will a clinical informatics focus mean for physicians?
Healthcare Analytics Help Mercy Uncover Cost, Quality Insights
Provider Data Management Offers Payers a Blockchain Use Case
Patient Management, Attribution Program Expands Access to Care
EHRs hold the key to data analytics if you know where to look
Can Patient Portals Provide Options for Mental Healthcare?
Patient-Centered Medical Homes Lag in HIT Care Coordination
Creating a Strategy to Raise Patient Engagement, Satisfaction
32 Pioneer Accountable Care Organizations Save $384 Million
Precision Medicine, Big Data Analytics Center Rises in Philly
Researchers study falls among the elderly with data analytics
CMS Innovation Award funds EHR care coordination pilot
29% of Healthcare Providers Currently Use Precision Medicine
NCQA: Patient-Centered Medical Home No Longer “Unduly Onerous”
AI, Big Data, IoT Bring Growth to Multiple Healthcare Markets
Big Data on Patient Transfers Raises Quality, Snags Revenue
Blockchain Activity Grows Sharply for Healthcare Payers, Providers
ONC Restructures Health IT Standards Committee into Task Forces
How to Gather Good Data for Healthcare Claims Accuracy Testing
Patient Adherence, Evidence-Based Care Top Priority for Docs
What are the basic pillars of population health management?
Genomic Medicine Initiatives Aid Undiagnosed Pediatric Patients
Internet of Things for Healthcare May be Worth $410B by 2022
FDA: Education, Population Health Can Fight Opioid Abuse
Population Health Management Requires Moving Beyond the EHR
Healthcare Big Data Analytics Suffers from “Fragmented” Approach
ONC Releases Final 2016 Health Data Interoperability Advisory
IOM Develops 15 Measures for Population Health Management
NIH Releases Big Data Resources for Brain Development Research
Pain monitoring database adds analytics to patient care
Case Western to Lead $27M Big Data Analytics Epilepsy Effort
EHR Vendors Increasingly Offering Population Health Tools
MIT Uses Deep Learning to Create ICU, EHR Predictive Analytics
Optum Buys Advisory Board’s Population Health, Data Analytics for $1.3B
Study: Socioeconomics, communities play role in cardiac health
Early Adopters Question Usefulness, Maturity of AI in Healthcare
IBM Watson, Boston Children’s Kick Precision Medicine into Gear
Breaking Down the ONC Health Data Interoperability Roadmap
Data Governance Can Help Improve Patient Matching Issues
Are Vendors, Providers Blocking Health Data Interoperability?
Adverse Events Reporting Standards Boost Patient Safety in PA
How big pharma uses big data to develop better drugs
ONC Exploring Use of Blockchain in EHRs, Healthcare IoT Devices
WEDI and NATE Partner for Patient Matching, Interoperability
Precision Medicine Aids 20% Drop in Pediatric Cancer Deaths
ACP: Use Population Health to Combat Opioids, Substance Abuse
CMS Hosts Help Session for Physician Quality Reporting System
New Approach Helps Health Information Exchanges Cross State Lines
Stanford starts first clinical informatics fellowship program
Using Health IT to Support the Patient-Centered Medical Home
Risk score roundup: How EHR analytics are changing healthcare
Patient safety is key with Ebola, but are nurses safe, too?
Clinical decision support, care coordination fight hepatitis C
Even More Top Healthcare Big Data Analytics Buzzwords to Know
Patient Navigators Shave Hours from Hospital Discharge Times
2. Observation patients
3. Hospital acquired conditions
4. Patient satisfaction scores on HCAPS
5. Performance on quality measures associated with federal value-based purchasing program
6. Physician performance related to costs, complications, and length of stay
“One of the biggest challenges is determining what meaningful, applicable data is, and what data was sent just because we’re able to send it,” she pointed out.  “There are so many sources within an organization that collect data that it becomes an overwhelming task.  I think it’s very important to remember that data analytics isn’t about the amount of data that’s collected, but about the integrity and applicability of that data to patient care and performance improvement moving forward.”
“As providers consider the move to Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), data on past performance and projected future performance is really the lynchpin in the decision-making process,” Gorman-Klug continued.  “Once you decide to move to an ACO, analysis of data becomes even more important.  What we’re also seeing is that people are really in survival mode, and that means many of them are considering merging with or acquiring other groups.  Data plays a role in this effort as well.  Taking a look at clinical and financial trends of other organizations is important when it comes to deciding whether or not you want to partner with them.”
“Another area where data analytics will play an integral role is in the transition to population health management.  Monitoring the patient across the continuum of care, whether or not they’ve received treatment at your facility or another facility or a clinic within a pharmacy or other neighborhood facility, is no easy feat.  As we move toward population health, having the ability to look at data and your related high-risk patients to identify areas of vulnerability will help drive optimization of services and patient outcomes.  At the end of the day, the true purpose of analytics is to deliver safe and quality care for patients and to help healthcare systems run more efficiently and cost-effectively.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare InformaticsPopulation Health Management


