Why are hospitals wary of accountable care organizations?

December 13, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 13, 2013 - The march of the accountable care organization (ACO) might not be as inexorable as many experts have predicted, according to a new survey conducted by Purdue Healthcare Advisors (PHA), which found that nearly half of hospital executives have no intention of participating in an ACO model in the near future.  While ACOs are becoming increasingly attractive to health plans and medical centers interested in improving care coordination and cutting costs, many smaller facilities feel that the financial outlay will eclipse any savings and would rather look to improving internal processes to trim their budgets.
PHA, a non-profit consulting firm affiliated with Purdue University, polled over 200 hospital leaders to produce the intriguing results.  While hospitals reported feeling overwhelmed by the laundry list of changes inherent in the Affordable Care Act, they are nervous about making a move towards the significantly different ACO model before seeing more proof that accountable care really works.
With nearly a third of the CMS Pioneer ACO program opting out after two years of participation, it’s easy to see why hospitals might not want to jump on the bandwagon just yet.  Seven out of the nine departing members failed to achieve cost savings, although instead of leaving the accountable care ecosystem all together, they simply applied for the Medicare Shared Savings Program, another form of ACO membership.
Of the leaders who have no plans to implement an ACO at their organization, many cited financial pressures and questions about care quality as top reasons.  A quarter believes that they will put more money into the program than they will get out, and 13% think the quality performance benchmarks are not realistic for their facility.  While 95% of participants have adopted EHRs already, they are still struggling with interoperability, analytics, security, and training their staff to use the new systems.
Dig Deeper
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
Meeting and maintaining the requirements of the EHR Incentive Programs seem to be more than enough to handle.  Hospitals are also scrambling to attack mounting financial threats.  Sixty percent are making an effort to reduce waste and inefficiencies, with 15% planning to save money by improving the quality of care.  One in five hospitals is considering cutting staff or reducing salaries in order to stay solvent.
With 20% of hospitals unsure if they will even be able to pay their bills, it’s not hard to see why so many are wary of the financial outlay required to form an integrated delivery network and bring physicians and other providers under the ACO umbrella.  Hospitals are still feeling the pinch from their investment in their EHR systems, and are still experiencing a great deal of worry about how to properly use their EHRs for quality care.
Despite the promise of significant savings and better coordination involved in forming an ACO, hospitals are simply overwhelmed with the basic functions of keeping their doors open. While sharing that financial risk with other partners may seem attractive, healthcare organizations will need to find their footing in the new world post-ACA before the majority will have the leisure to contemplate joining an ACO.
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsCare CoordinationContinuum of CareHealthcare Business IntelligencePay for Performance


