Grants spur research into genomics, big data, applied analytics

October 08, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 08, 2013 - With big research grants come big opportunities to translate academic analytics into real-life tools available at the point of care.  From entrepreneurial accelerators to government initiatives to private funding for promising ways to improve care coordination and develop algorithms to predict risk, analytics research is experiencing a growth spurt that will help develop solutions for community providers and hospitals nationwide.
Geisinger Health System receives $1.4 million for genomics research: Geisinger Health System’s Genomic Medicine Institute recently announced a $1.4 million grant from the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, intended to help scientists study how to share genomics results with providers and patients to improve decision making.  Researchers from Pennsylvania State University and Virginia Tech will study ways to integrate genetic information into personalized medical treatments for those with risk factors for certain cancers and other genetic diseases.
“We believe that a new type of genomic test report, tailored for patient as well as clinician use, promotes shared decision making and trust,” said lead researcher Marc Williams, director of the Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger’s Sigfried and Janet Weis Center for Research. “It also allows patients to be more involved in the management of their disorders, better navigate the healthcare system, and make more informed decisions about their health and healthcare in conjunction with their clinicians.”
$45.3 million awarded to Stanford Center for Clinical and Translational Research and Education (Spectrum): The large grant from the National Institutes of Health, part of the Clinical and Translational Sciences Awards, will help support new programs at Stanford focused on disease diagnostics and population health.  The funding will be used for developing new methods of testing and preventing disease through advances in omics, immune monitoring, molecular imaging, single-cell analysis, computation, and informatics, the school said.
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
EHR Sample Size Matters in Machine Learning, Predictive Analytics
Robert Harrington, professor and chair of medicine; Mark Cullen, professor of medicine and chief of the Division of General Medical Disciplines and Douglas Owens, professor of medicine and director of the Stanford Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research and the Center for Health Policy will lead the new programs.
Hubble Telemedical receives USDA grant for predictive diabetes assessments: The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has awarded Hubble Telemedical a Phase II Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) grant to help the company develop commercialized algorithms for the prediction of diabetes.
“Hubble’s innovative telemedical solutions are bringing expert care to underserved patients in rural communities, who previously had little or no access to tertiary care providers,” says Dr. Edward Chaum, MD, Hubble Telemedical’s co-founder and Chief Medical Officer. “Our solutions leverage proprietary informatics methodologies and the connectivity of the Internet to provide a scalable, web-based, and cost-effective solution for high throughput, point-of-care assessment and management of diabetic disease complications for improved efficiency and health outcomes.”
New York Digital Health Accelerator aids startups to improve care coordination: An entrepreneurial boot camp in New York has secured $4.2 million in funding to help 17 pilot projects tackle challenges including medication management, discharge coordination, and physician communication to improve the continuity of care.  As the program continues, it is expected to create 1,500 jobs and generate $150 million to $200 million in additional venture capital investment in the New York area, which will spur further innovation in health IT.
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsMedical ResearchPredictive Analytics


