50M Patients Will Access Open EHR Notes with New Partnership

December 15, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 15, 2015 - Fifty million patients across the nation will soon have access to more of their electronic health record information thanks to a $10 million joint initiative between the Cambia Health Foundation, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, Peterson Center on Healthcare, and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
The funding will be used to expand the adoption of OpenNotes, a national program that encourages patient engagement and improved provider communication by allowing patients to view – and in some cases add to – their unfiltered visit documentation.
The OpenNotes project started with several patient pilots within the Geisinger Health System, Harborview Medical Center in Seattle, and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC) in 2010, and quickly saw high levels of satisfaction from patients and their providers alike.
In 2013, Geisinger and BIDMC found that 80 percent of patient participants felt more in control of their care after gaining access to their EHR data, while 70 percent added that they were more likely to adhere to treatment plans once they knew what their physicians were saying about them.
A follow-up study published in November of 2015 found that patients did indeed exhibit higher levels of medication adherence.  Nearly 80 percent of patients who had access to OpenNotes while taking antihypertensive medicines remained adherent to their medication plans, compared to just 75.3 percent of patients prescribed the same regimen who did not view their data.
READ MORE: Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
“Our research shows increasingly that patients can benefit greatly from reading the notes taken during a medical visit. They tell us they feel more in control of their care and are more likely to follow up on recommendations,” said Jan Walker, RN, MBA, co-founder of OpenNotes and Assistant Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School and BIDMC.
“This has enormous implications for improving the quality and costs of care. Moreover, we’re learning that having a second set of eyes on the record may be an important way to improve patient safety.”
The newly announced injection of funding will allow providers to continue expanding OpenNotes to millions of additional patients, and may encourage healthcare providers to take a more transparent, collaborative, and thoughtful approach to patient care.
“OpenNotes will make clinicians’ thinking far more transparent, and that holds both complex and exciting implications for patients, for their family members, and for the host of health providers who care for them. This is particularly true for vulnerable populations, and patients with a large burden of chronic illness, including mental illness,” said Tom Delbanco, MD, co-founder of OpenNotes, a primary care doctor at BIDMC and a Professor of General Medicine and Primary Care at Harvard Medical School.
“Opening the doctor’s black box breaks down traditional barriers and provides a foundation for all kinds of exciting innovations in health care, changes that in my view will benefit the vast majority of patients and their clinicians,” he added.
READ MORE: 21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Providers were just as happy as their patients to participate in the program.  Ninety-nine percent of patients wanted to continue with open access after the study ended, and not one of the physicians involved in the initial 2013 study decided to opt out when given the chance.
“OpenNotes is a remarkably simple way to substantially improve health care by fueling transparency and communication,” said Dominick Frosch, PhD, from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, one of the institutions funding the expansion project.
“We view this as a ‘must-have’ tool for everyone and why the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation and its foundation partners have come together to spread OpenNotes to reach as many patients as possible, to enable better health care experiences and outcomes.”
Open EHR data access may be a simple and effective way to foster patient engagement and encourage the delivery of more proactive preventative care.  Unrelated studies have shown that engaged patients are more likely to keep their health insurance plans, while those who have better access to primary care providers are less likely to choose expensive care options like emergency rooms for routine needs.
 “Health outcomes, cost of care, patient experience and clinician satisfaction are all important indicators of whether the healthcare system is performing well, and we believe that OpenNotes can improve the system on all those measures,” said Jeffrey Selberg of the Peterson Center on Healthcare, another funding contributor. “Learning how OpenNotes spreads to 50 million patients will also help as we seek to spread and scale other innovations that improve the system along these measures.”
Tagged EHR Patient DataPatient EngagementPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


