EHR Data Analytics Flag Hidden Benefits of Pharmaceuticals

November 25, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Metformin is associated with significant improvements in cancer survival rates, shows a new study harnessing EHR data analytics.
November 25, 2014 - A team of researchers at Vanderbilt University Medical Center is using EHR data analytics to reveal some unanticipated benefits from certain pharmaceuticals.  In an effort to highlight the potential for using clinical analytics to sift through big data in innovative ways, the researchers found that metformin, a medication commonly used to treat diabetes, may also have an impact on cancer survival rates.  The study, published in JAMIA this month, shows that some drugs may have hidden properties with patterns that can only be detected with sophisticated and large-scale data analysis.
Josh Denny, MD, MS, Associate Professor of Biomedical Informatics and Medicine, Hua Xu, PhD. MPhil, MS, Adjunct Associate Professor of Biomedical Informatics, and colleagues at Columbia University and the Mayo Clinic linked the EHR systems at Vanderbilt and Mayo with the tumor registries at both institutions, forming a cohort of more than 100,000 patients.  Over 42,000 patients had a cancer diagnosis within the study period.  The team further refined the results by flagging 3,496 patients with Type 2 diabetes who were also suffering from cancer.
They found that patients who were taking metformin, an oral hypoglycemic medication that has been in use for decades to treat diabetes, had measurably lower mortality rates than non-diabetic patients or those who were on other diabetic treatment regimens.  Metformin was associated with a 22% decrease in overall mortality compared to patients on other oral diabetes medications, and a 39% decrease in mortality compared to patients who were only receiving insulin.  The drug was also associated with a 23% better survival rate than patients who were not diabetic at all.
“We leveraged study site-maintained tumor registries combined with advanced informatics techniques examining the full text of the EHR,” the study authors explain. “Prior studies have shown such methods lead to more accurate results than use of administrative data alone, as has been used in previous studies. These informatics methods, applied at both study sites, interrogated patient records to provide information on detailed medication exposures and important cancer risk factors such as smoking histories and BMI—detail not commonly afforded in retrospective claims data.”
Dig Deeper
EHR Sample Size Matters in Machine Learning, Predictive Analytics
Open Source EHR Generator Delivers Healthcare Big Data with FHIR
Penn Med. Population Health Analytics Dashboard Wins ECRI Prize
“With the future ubiquity of available EHR data, such data mining may provide an important tool for drug repurposing, pharmacovigilance, and comparative effectiveness research,” the authors add.  Denny and Xu plan to expand their methods in the future to dive deeper into metformin and its impact on cancer, as well as to discover other associations that may be as of yet undetected.
The study is important not only to informaticists and to cancer patients, but also to pharmaceutical companies who are seeking ways to bring more effective therapies to market without decades in research and development that can cost billions of dollars.  By identifying possible new uses for existing drugs with proven safety records, pharmaceutical developers can skip a few steps ahead in the difficult process of testing medications for new conditions and gaining approval to prescribe and market their products.
“We are cutting down the decade or more and the $1 billion it can typically take to translate a laboratory finding into a successful drug treatment to about one to two years and spending about $100,000,” said Atul Butte, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Pediatrics at Stanford University, who has done research on the way some antidepressants can improve the outcome of small-cell lung cancers by sorting through hundreds of thousands of genetic profiles.
Denny and Xu note in their study that access to large volumes of patient data is the key to effectively harnessing these analytics techniques.  One of the reasons they were successful with the project was the fact that metformin is such a common treatment for an incredibly prevalent condition.  Smaller trials with narrower objectives may benefit from the cooperation of pharmaceutical company data, the FDA, and even with competing EHR systems that pool data together to provide a useful databank for ongoing research.
Tagged Big DataClinical AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsEHR Data Analytics


