Bariatric Surgery Drops Chronic Disease Drug Spending by 22.4%

November 06, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Weight loss surgery reduces reliance on medications for chronic diseases while cutting overall healthcare costs.
November 06, 2014 - Patients who undergo bariatric surgery end up taking fewer medications for chronic diseases such as diabetes and heart disease, according to a study presented at the 31st Annual Meeting of the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS), spending nearly a quarter less on drugs than their non-surgical peers.  Despite the initial expense of gastric band or bypass surgery, patients who underwent the procedure incurred fewer costs across the healthcare system and significantly reduced their reliance on medications for cardiac and metabolic conditions.
“As patients lose weight after surgery, they typically see significant improvements in many obesity-related conditions including diabetes, hypertension and heart disease, while similar patients who don’t have surgery often see their conditions become worse,” said study author John M. Morton, MD, Chief of Bariatric and Minimally Invasive Surgery at the Stanford University School of Medicine. “This study shows these trends have significant cost implications for patients and the healthcare system at large.”
The researchers compared 2,700 patients undergoing bariatric surgery with the same number of non-surgical patients with similar overall health status and body mass index (BMI).  While surgical candidates spent about $600 more per year on medications before the surgery ($3,098 per year for surgical patients vs. $2,303 for non-surgical patients), the numbers flipped by 12 months post-operation.  Over the next four years, surgical patients spent a total of $8,411 on pharmacy services compared to $9,900 accrued by obesity patients who did not opt for the procedure.
The study also examined the impact of surgically-assisted weight loss on medications targeted to chronic diseases.  After weight loss surgery, the use of drugs used to treat diabetes dropped by 73.7 percent, while cardiac medication use was nearly cut in half. While gastric band or bypass procedures can cost between $17,000 and $30,000 per patient, the reduction in subsequent costs and the lower risk of serious complications from chronic diseases may offset the initial spending within just a few years.
Dig Deeper
High-Need Patients a Challenge for Population Health Management
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
Epic Systems Integrates Geisinger Population Health Toolkit
“Modern bariatric surgery can cut your diabetes medicines by nearly three-quarters, reduce your heart medication by about half and reduce your pharmacy bill by more than 20 percent. The impact of bariatric surgery on medication utilization is significant,” said co-author Ninh T. Nguyen, MD, vice-chair of the UC Irvine Department of Surgery and chief of gastrointestinal surgery.  Dr. Nguyen is also the president of the ASMBS.
“The health and economic case for bariatric surgery is compelling, yet we are only performing these operations on less than 1 percent of potential candidates,” added Raul Rosenthal, MD, director of the Bariatric and Metabolic Institute at Cleveland Clinic Florida, who was not involved in the study. “We need to make rational choices when it comes to healthcare and the right choice for patients with obesity may be bariatric surgery.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


