ICD-10 Group Slams “Safe Harbor” Bills, Debunks Coding Myths

June 16, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 16, 2015 - Mention the phrase “ICD-10 transition” to a healthcare provider, and most will respond with an instinctive grimace and a few choice words for federal regulators intent on seeing the new code set implemented on October 1, 2015 – for real, this time. 
ICD-10 holds promise for the advancement of clinical analytics and even for the revenue cycles of healthcare organizations that can embrace the level of detail and specificity required for more accurate payment, but the majority of providers have been sweating over the complex and costly implementation process for years thanks to multiple delays that have pushed back the deadline again and again. 
Lawmakers and regulators seem pretty serious about maintaining the 2015 deadline, now less than four short months away.  However, lobbying efforts by the American Medical Association and other skeptical, wary groups have prompted the introduction of several pieces of legislation that may change the structure and impact of the ICD-10 transition. 
Chief among these creative implementation strategies is the concept of a “grace period” or “safe harbor,” which would prevent CMS from denying claims due solely to the use of an inaccurate or unspecified ICD-10 code for up to two years.  The ICD-TEN Act (HR 2247) and the Protecting Patients and Physicians against Coding Act of 2015 (HR 2652) both hope to ease providers into the level of data integrity and clinical documentation improvement necessary to code to ICD-10’s highest specificity while ensuring that their revenue cycles don’t suffer unduly from the switch.
While these bills may seem promising to the large number of healthcare providers still slogging through the uncertainty and persistent challenges of the ICD-10 transition, the Coalition for ICD-10 does not believe that the “safe harbor” idea is as safe as it would seem. 
READ MORE: Mismatched Symptoms Call EHR Data Integrity into Question
In a strongly worded public statement intended to clarify several lingering myths about the role of ICD-10 in billing and reimbursement, the Coalition warns that the pending bills are only reinforcing misconceptions about ICD-10, and may produce “far-reaching, negative consequences” if implemented.
The first mistake made by lawmakers is believing that ICD-10 coding directly impacts the way physicians are paid, the Coalition says.  “These bills are predicated on the assumption that the coding of ICD-10 diagnoses directly impacts physician payments and that ICD-10 coding will be a burden because required ICD-10 detail is not readily known or available in the medical record,” the statement says. “Both of these assumptions are false.”
Physician providers are paid based on reported CPT codes, the Coalition points out, not based on ICD-9 or ICD-10.  And even if ICD-10 was used directly for payment, Medicare’s recent end-to-end testing weeks have showed that that only two percent of claims were denied due entirely to ICD-10 coding errors.  Some of these claims may also have been improperly coded on purpose in an effort to conduct “negative testing” of the system.
The Coalition also takes the industry to task for focusing so much on the “burdens” of clinical documentation improvement.  While anecdotes abound about sullen, reluctant physicians fighting CDI efforts and railing against the extra time and effort involved in documenting clinical details, the Coalition believes that many of these complaints simply expose the fact that providers are failing in their basic documentation duties no matter what code set is in place.
“Much of the expanded detail in ICD-10 is very basic information that should be readily available in the medical record,” the group states. “For example, almost half the increase in the number of codes in ICD-10 is simply due to the reporting of laterality. The right/left body part distinction should always be specified in any well-documented medical record.”
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
“Indeed, laterality is already a subcode modifier in the CPT coding system developed by the AMA and used by physicians to report procedures,” the statement points out. “CPT codes are very detailed and yet CPT coding is not considered a burden.”
Many providers have actually seen measurable benefits from basic clinical documentation improvement programs even before ICD-10 implementation.  Bringing clinical documentation up to an acceptable level of detail has helped organizations take advantage of payment structures already in place without many major physician revolts.
The Coalition, which has brought together a large number of professional and industry groups including the American Hospital Association, AHIMA, CHIME, AMIA, HFMA, AHIP, and a wide array of vendors, payers, and provider organizations, also reiterates that unspecified ICD-10 codes play an important and useful part in the new structure, just as they do in ICD-9.
“No payer, including Medicare, has suggested these nonspecific codes would not be allowed on ICD-10 claims,” the Coalition emphasizes.
Instead of helping providers through a difficult time, a “safe harbor” arrangement threatens to expose Medicare to fraud and abuse if claims cannot be denied due to inaccurate coding.  The grace period may just extend the ability of providers to skate by with deeply flawed clinical documentation, furthering the problems encountered by health information exchanges and clinical analytics experts who rely on high levels of data integrity, completeness, and accuracy to generate the actionable insights necessary for population health management.
READ MORE: Health Data Analytics a “Competitive Differentiator” for Payers
Additionally, the language of the legislation does not mandate that private payers implement a similar tactic, which means that providers who rely on payers other than Medicare will still need to scrub up on their clinical documentation if they wish to meet ICD-10 standards for their other business partners.
“Safe harbor is just another delay by a different name,” the Coalition declares.  After three consecutive years of delay, it seems clear that there will always be providers who will wait until the last possible second to prepare for the mandate.  Pushing back full ICD-10 implementation even further will only hurt those providers that have made a good faith effort to prepare.
“As long as physicians aren’t expected to document and code as specifically as possible, many of them will continue to delay doing so. It can be predicted with virtual certainty that at the end of the safe harbor, there will be new demands for a reprieve from ICD-10 because there hasn’t been enough time to prepare.”
“The endless rumors about another delay or safe harbor provisions postpone physicians from making the effort to get ready,” the Coalition concludes, urging providers and regulators to remember that CMS and other organizations have been making free or low-cost ICD-10 transition resources available to the industry for several years.  Providers still have some time to get ready for the switch, and should be prepared to jump into ICD-10 without the dubious aid of “safe harbor” provisions to soften the blow.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealth Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


