Maximizing healthcare analytics: Data warehouse focuses

October 29, 2013

By Patrick Ouellette
October 29, 2013 - Whether healthcare organizations are analyzing data in preparation for Stage 2 Meaningful Use or for Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS) requirements, the specific healthcare analytics needed and form in which data is presented gives insight into current provider needs and the technology available to support those needs.
Micky Tripathi, Massachusetts eHealth Collaborative (MAeHC) CEO, has watched healthcare analytics trends evolve since MAeHC began as a non-profit in 2005. MAeHC uses a data warehouse to pull in large sets of provider data and present analytics based on the data back to them in whichever form they need.  Tripathi explained to HealthITAnalytics.com which measures customers are looking for in working with MAeHC and how providers are using the data they receive back.
What types of data you collect at MAeHC?
Tripathi: We have a commercial data warehouse that we offer to the market for a variety of analytics needs, focused on clinical analytics first and foremost, but this year we’re starting to incorporate claims data as well. We were just certified for Stage 2 Meaningful Use as a modular EHR, so we’re up on the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) website as a certified solution for ambulatory measures. And we’re certified for 29 of 64 ambulatory measures right now, based on immediate customer needs, and by the first quarter of calendar year 2014, we’ll be certified for all 64 ambulatory measures and for at least 16 of the hospital measures. One of our biggest customers asked us if we can get certified for hospital measures as well to support their meaningful use program.
How do you collect it?
READ MORE: Population Health, Value-Based Care Still Challenging for ACOs
Tripathi: We base the data warehouse on automated data feeds from EHR systems. So it happens behind the scenes– clinicians don’t have to do anything outside of their regular EHR documentation. When clinicians lock their notes, behind the scenes a standards-compliant continuity of care document is created automatically, encrypted and then sent to us via Massachusetts Health Information Highway (HIway). And, for example, in the Albany, New York area there’s another healthcare information exchange (HIE) called Hixny that providers send their EHRs to and HIXNY routes them to us through FedEx or the U.S. Post Office.
We then aggregate that data in real-time and provide back analytics to our customers. These include basic, nationally-validated measures such as Stage 1 Meaningful or Stage 2 Meaningful. We do measures for accountable care organizations (ACOs), such as Pioneer ACOs, and we’re a certified data sedition vendor for the CMS PQRS program. And we do custom measures as well, such as a project in the Adirondacks where we do custom medical home measures, run the analytics and provide the measured results back to them. This can be at an individual provider level, group level or at an enterprise level, however they want it.
How are organizations getting back and using that data?
Tripathi: We offer it back to customers in almost any way they would like it based on their particular use cases. And that’s one of the areas that we’ve seen a lot of dynamism in and there are a lot of things that keep us on our toes and require us to change things on the fly. The MAeHC data warehouse was originally created in 2005 to support Massachusetts Blue Cross Blue Shield pilot projects. It started out as being research-based, but then providers wanted to get data sent back to them so they can use it for benchmarking and quality improvement purposes. So we created a web portal that allowed individual providers to look at their data on the front end in a scatter plot for a blinded data comparison with their peers.
After the pilot project ended and we were offering it commercially, the customers who hired us did not want to make the data available to individual providers. They wanted to make the data available at the network level. One big customer, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC), thought the providers just didn’t have time and they would never look at the analytics. And it said that there would be confusion because of a discrepancy in measures. Provider EHRs, build to calculate measures based on meaningful use, would have different measures than what we were calculating at the warehouse level because we have access to more information.
READ MORE: UnitedHealth Supports Bundled Payments with Health Data Analytics
For example, for the same measure, the warehouse is saying “I’m 74 percent on diabetes” and my EHR says “I’m 63 percent”. And, lastly, BIDMC didn’t want to expose it because they’re already doing work as a network with all of their providers for ACOs and other things. What they wanted to do was take the data, incorporate it in all the other information that we’re doing around care management and decision support or high-risk patient identification and then present it to the physician in a consolidated way.
What are some other customer concentrations?
Tripathi: We’ve found that it’s more the enterprise that wants the data and then they include that in all the underlying work they’re doing with physicians rather than having the warehouse results reported directly to the physician. From our perspective, they’re going to use the data best is the right way. And customers increasingly want to use the information not just for performance measurement but for ongoing care management. Customers don’t want to wait for the end of reporting periods – they want to be able to proactively take a step, with my care management process, to intervene in whatever is going on with this practice. An instance would be reminding a patient that they have a diabetics meeting or they have lab tests ready. This also stresses the system’s technology because instead of doing batch analytics runs, some customers are saying they want runs dine in real time so the system can be continually updated.
Tagged Accountable Care OrganizationsHealthcare Data AnalyticsHIE AnalyticsPhysician Quality Reporting System PQRS


