Pathologists, labs play critical role in healthcare analytics

September 24, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 24, 2013 - Pathologists and laboratory professionals need to understand the importance of their role in the changing healthcare landscape, says James M. Crawford, MD, PhD, FASCP, senior VP of laboratory medicine at North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, especially when it comes to the enormous wealth of data they contribute to analytics.  Labs produce and collect a staggering amount of data, Crawford says, but are just starting to make use of the information for population health management.
“Since the dawn of modern pathology and laboratory medicine in the 19th century, the professions have served populations but have not taken effective advantage of the data it provides to support healthcare for regional populations,” Crawford writes for Laboratory Manager.  “Now is the time, for two reasons. First, ­laboratory data provides critical insight into how healthy or not healthy a population is, and health systems will now be held accountable for the efficacy of healthcare to these populations. Every arena of pathology and laboratory medicine provides an opportunity to analyze and reflect back to healthcare providers and administrators.”
From flagging unnecessary testing to figuring out how well laboratories are delivering healthcare to identifying pockets of diseases or potential risks, labs need to reach out to their partner providers – and providers need to see laboratories as valuable sources of data, not just as a commodity.  Labs and clinical providers also need to collaborate on ways to improve the exchange of data in an era of imperfect EHR solutions, Crawford notes.  By streamlining and standardizing information, labs and providers can create better data for patient care and for use in analytical systems.
“Pathologists have an opportunity to help the primary care practitioner have the information in hand for achieving the coordinated care of their patients,” he writes.  Labs are deeply integrated into new care delivery models such as accountable care organizations (ACOs) and patient-centered medical homes (PCMH), and are a vital piece of the care continuum, working to inform other providers of key indicators of a patient’s health.
Dig Deeper
Six Pediatric Hospitals Create Personalized Medicine Coalition
How Big Data Analytics Underpins Every Healthcare Trend
Big Data Analytics, Population Health Top Executive Priority List
“The concepts of population-based management of chronic illness, comprehensive and coordinated care across the continuum of care, and reduction of healthcare delivery costs, reside in the ACO. It is the “neighborhood” that surrounds PCMH and includes the clinical lab as ‘a’ – if not ‘the’ – clinical service that substantially informs how effectively that healthcare is being delivered. Pathologists are being given unprecedented opportunity to effect real change and provide a leadership role in redesigning how society delivers healthcare.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceHealthcare AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


