Optum Seeks Healthcare Big Data, AI Start-Ups with $250M Fund

November 29, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 29, 2017 - A new $250 million venture fund from Optum, the health services and analytics arm of UnitedHealthcare, will offer innovative big data and artificial intelligence start-ups the opportunity to grow quickly in a crowded, highly competitive market, the company announced this week.
Optum Ventures will invest in promising entrepreneurs focused on improving the healthcare system in measurable ways while leveraging big data analytics and emerging technologies like machine learning and AI.
“Human health is a critical value we all share. And yet our health care system is expensive, inefficient, confusing and inequitable. We see this as a major opportunity,” says the organization’s website.
“We look for exceptional teams with data-driven technologies and services that are poised to deeply disrupt the status quo. By investing in early-stage companies with a transformative vision for making health care better for everyone, we will affect change.”
In addition to funding, the new initiative will provide strategic guidance and development support so start-ups can build relationships and form partnerships with key players in the industry.
READ MORE: Navigating the Hype of Healthcare Artificial Intelligence Companies
“Optum Ventures is uniquely positioned to help develop and grow startups and early-stage companies through capital investment, Optum’s decades of experience in health care, and our access to the health care marketplace,” said Larry Renfro, CEO of Optum and Managing Partner of Optum Ventures.
“Optum Ventures will be the partner of choice for companies developing innovations that help make health care work better for everyone.”
Optum isn’t the only industry player angling to shepherd the next game-changing algorithm through the rocky process of commercialization – it isn’t even the only payer-backed organization taking on the challenge.
Earlier in November, Humana announced a California-based innovation contest that put close to $20,000 up for grabs for new ideas about how to use machine learning, AI, natural language processing, and big data analytics to improve the EHR usability experience.
“Traditionally, the health care industry has stored digital health records - medical claims, pharmacy claims, calls, letters, hospital stays, and health program participation - in disparate places across different systems,” Humana said in a press release.
READ MORE: Artificial Intelligence is Altering Healthcare, but Not with “Magic”
“But with advanced data processing and analytics, it is now possible to assemble these data sources into a chronological ‘story,’ with all the different elements stitched together into a logical time order. Now that the data is organized, the opportunity is to present the data through a tool simple enough to allow users to make sense of even the most complex chronic history.”
Powerful forces in the consumer technology world are also looking to incubators and venture funds as a promising entry point into healthcare. 
Microsoft and Google have both recently offered millions to early-stage start-ups looking for an edge with provider and payer customers.
With a strong focus on artificial intelligence, Microsoft is using $3.5 million in prize money to encourage entrepreneurs to apply for its global Innovate.AI challenge.
“At Microsoft, the future is rooted in the advancement of AI technologies,” said Nagraj Kashyap, corporate vice president, global head of Microsoft Ventures.
READ MORE: Gates Invests $50M in Big Data, Precision Medicine for Alzheimer’s
“We’re excited to launch this competition with a strong group of venture capitalists that recognizes the importance of leveraging these technologies to amplify human ingenuity and power innovation in AI forward.”
Google is similarly interested in sharing its knowledge and connections with fledgling companies that leverage machine learning and other cutting-edge methodologies to improve healthcare.
The company is touting its six-month mentorship program called Launchpad Studio, which has already enrolled a class of four machine learning companies focused on use cases including sepsis, traumatic brain injury, and provider burnout.
“Working side-by-side with experts from across Google product and research teams - including Google Cloud, Verily, X, Brain, ML Research -, we intend to support these startups on their journey to build successful applications, and explore leveraging Google Cloud Platform, TensorFlow, Android, and other Google platforms,” said Malika Cantor, Developer Relations Program Manager.
“Launchpad Studio has also enlisted the expertise of a number of top industry practitioners and thought leaders to ensure Studio startups are successful in practice and long-term.”
Like Google’s Launchpad Studio, Optum Ventures has already worked with four companies that are leveraging artificial intelligence techniques to tackle difficult problems in patient care.
Initial investments have been made in cloud=based tools that support better performance for life sciences companies and business intelligence for providers, as well as patient-facing digital assistants and provider clinical decision support tools leveraging artificial intelligence.
“Optum Ventures brings confidence and a contemporary flair to its investments,” said Partner Virginia McFerran, according to the organization’s website.
“The people in our portfolio companies, all of them, are committed to making the health care system work better. They are not afraid to challenge the 'old ways' and are savvy enough to balance rigorous focus with ego-free flexibility.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureArtificial Intelligence in HealthcareClinical AnalyticsMachine LearningPopulation Health Management


