Improved medication adherence is key to population health

October 08, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 08, 2013 - Want to reduce preventable readmissions, keep patients away from the emergency room, and boost your HEDIS scores?  Using analytics to identify chronic disease trends is a great first step, but focusing your data on improving medication adherence once patients leave the clinic can do even more good in the fight to raise quality and reduce system-wide costs.  Raising adherence by five percent can slash overall costs by one percent, a huge return on a relatively simple educational effort targeted towards vulnerable patients.
There is no specific profile when it comes to patients not taking their medication.  From sullen teenagers to forgetful senior citizens, busy parents who can’t make it to the pharmacy or those who simply can’t afford the costs, non-adherence touches every type of patient in every socioeconomic bracket.  Unsurprisingly, patients who suffer from depression are among the least likely to fill their prescriptions properly, while retirement seems to relax people so much that medications become even less important over time.
For population health managers, therefore, raising adherence levels can be a puzzle.  Treating depression may help some patients fill their prescriptions more regularly, but oftentimes an improvement in depression is dependent on receiving regular medication.  Patients typically need more pharmaceutical help managing their health as they age, but they are also more likely to need a family member or caregiver to manage their regimen while feeling that staying on track with pills is not as central to their health as their physicians might think.
These issues cost the healthcare system more than $300 billion a year.  But applying predictive analytics to patient data sets can help stem the tide by developing risk scores to identify likely non-adherents.  “Without applying predictive analytics to this, they are just doing more of the same stuff and that hasn’t solved the problem yet,” says Clifford Jones, CEO of Allazo Health. “By choosing the right way to help a particular patient, you can, across the population, generate a greater uplift in medication adherence.”
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
Regional Variation Points Out Value of Antibiotic Stewardship
Identifying problem patients using predictive analytics can nip non-adherence in the bud.  Just like with preventable readmissions, diabetes, dementia, and heart attacks, gleaning clues from clinical data can flag potential problems with medication adherence and suggest individualized attention, such as targeted motivational interviews or a session with a care coordinator, that can help patients understand why taking their medications as prescribed is so important.
“For starters, significant returns from improved use of medicines and improved adherence should be a central goal of health reform,” asserts Tom Hubbard, Vice President of Policy Research at the New England Healthcare Institute, in a blog for Health Affairs.  “The real question is just how well all these factors are clicking together right now, how they can click together better, and how we can speed the process up.  For one thing, the appropriate decision making is complex. It not only involves the clinical process of matching individual patients with the right medication regimen, but also matching the patient with the right education, counseling, and services that help sustain adherence.”
A recent study suggests that patients with schizophrenia were more likely to stick to their regimens and significantly less likely to be hospitalized after being tracked over time by a supportive professional.  Using the IndiGO risk score and an education video to supplement traditional population management techniques left 80% of physicians feeling like the “teachable moment” was very helpful for their wayward patients, and the score raised statin prescriptions by nearly fivefold.
Medication adherence is clearly in line with the larger goals of healthcare reform, and is an area of population health management that can benefit immensely from predictive analytics and big data.  Not only can it lower costs for an individual provider, but it can close gaps in the continuum of care to ensure each patient is moving through the system with the optimal amount of attention and care.  “Many of the means to speed up the returns from improved medication use are in our grasp already,” Hubbard says. “We need to understand how well the various pieces of the puzzle are fitting together.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig Data AnalyticsClinical DataPatient DataPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


