Workplace focus on chronic disease may improve management

April 25, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 25, 2014 - Bringing chronic disease management into the workplace may be an important tool for ensuring that patients with diabetes, asthma, hypertension, or obesity maintain good lifestyle choices and optimal health.  With a $3.15 million grant from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, researchers at the University of Georgia will take the next five years to explore how bringing disease management workshops directly to employees might help ensure better overall wellness.
“It is estimated that the number of workers between the ages of 65 and 74 will increase by 83 percent from 2006 to 2016, and those age 75 and older will increase by 84 percent,” said Mark Wilson, Associate Dean and Professor in the UGA Department of Health Promotion and Behavior. “Many of these older workers will have one or more chronic diseases. As a result, disease management is becoming an increasingly important part of maintaining a productive, competitive and ultimately healthy American workforce.”
Along with Matthew Lee Smith, an assistant professor in the same department, Wilson will try to translate Stanford University’s widely used Chronic Disease Self-Management Program (CDSMP) to fit into the workplace.  The program is currently used in community centers and hospitals, Wilson says, and focuses on pain management, nutrition, exercise, and improving communication with providers.  But the research team believes that offices and other workplace locations are an untapped resource for population health managers to conduct outreach and education for an increasingly aging patient pool.
“Time constraints and other logistical impediments have offered challenges for health promotion practitioners interested in implementing these programs at the worksite,” Smith says. “We see the translation of CDSMP as an essential and important opportunity to ensure worksites can take advantage of this robust and effective program, which in turn will ensure it reaches employees that need these program benefits.”
Dig Deeper
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Partnership Offers Chronic Disease Management at Pharmacies
NH Population Health Management Program Cuts Overdoses by 34%
Providers are using a variety of strategies to try to reach patients outside of the consult room, especially those with ongoing care needs that require constant managing and vigilance. “Eighty percent of the issues our health system face today have to do with chronic diseases, and if we can really impact these issues on a population level, we can really make a difference in our ability to deal with both the quality of care and the costs of care,” says Mansoor Khan, ScD, CEO of Alere Analytics, which is helping to bring home monitoring into the equation for chronically ill patients.
Other organizations are helping patients track their health through employee wellness programs, including mHealth apps that allow workers to tackle mental health issues, diet and exercise, and chronic conditions while allowing primary care providers to keep in touch with the data produced by assessments and coaching programs.
“One of the sad truths of behavioral health is that very few people with behavioral health problems are being treated in the healthcare system because they’re not stepping forward. Identifying behavioral health problems is important on an employer level because we’re getting access to these people before they even show up in the healthcare system,” says Richard Bedrosian, PhD, Director of Behavioral Health at Wellness & Prevention, Inc., a Johnson & Johnson Company.
“We’ve had more than 270,000 people use our behavioral health programs, and the vast majority of them weren’t getting any other services.  It’s really, really important to increase awareness and guide people toward the programs and resources that will help them.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementClinical IntelligencePopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


