Care Coordination, Quality Care Can Increase Patient Loyalty

August 31, 2015

By Sara Heath
August 31, 2015 - In the healthcare industry, ensuring patient consumer loyalty to a certain healthcare provider is critical not only for organization finances, but for physician reputation and job fulfillment as well. But what are the key factors in consumer satisfaction? What makes a patient likely to return to a hospital or recommend it to a friend? Press Ganey recently released a research note on the subject, citing important factors such as care coordination, quality care, and communication with patients as high indicators of consumer loyalty.
Press Ganey determined these factors by surveying patients in inpatient, outpatient, and emergency department settings to analyze the most and least important factors in consumer loyalty.
By surveying 937,000 patients in an outpatient care setting, Press Ganey was able to determine that an important factor in consumer loyalty was the confidence a patient has in his or her physician. Patients also value physicians who are able to work cooperatively with other members of their team and when care is well coordinated. The third most important factor was the indication that physicians genuinely cared for the patient’s well being.
The note states that many non-medically related factors were not deemed statistically important in patients’ loyalty to the provider.
Dig Deeper
Big Data Shows Gender-Based Medical Error, Patient Safety Patterns
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
“Of interest is the fact that considerations such as waiting time, convenience and amenities were not statistically important loyalty indicators,” the note says. “The implication is that, while patients would of course prefer to wait less and have greater convenience, their likelihood of recommending providers is driven by other factors.”
Results for inpatients and emergency room patients were similar. In inpatient hospital settings, the notion that physicians worked well with other team members was of very high importance for consumer loyalty. In fact, 87.1 percent of the 1.2 million patients surveyed who experienced care coordination the most also gave hospitals high overall ratings.
“This research implies that coordination of care supersedes all other drivers,” the note confirms. “When patients felt that personnel worked well together and their care was coordinated, items such as cleanliness of the rooms emerged, followed on both sides of the tree by empathy on the part of nurses.”
Among key factors in the emergency department is pain control while waiting in the emergency department. Other key factors include the notion that staff care about patients as individuals and that patients are kept well-informed of delays.
In fact, emergency department patients are more concerned with quality of care and communication than they are wait times. Even when kept waiting for four or more hours, 97.6 percent of patients who receive quality care and adequate notice of delays in care are likely to recommend their hospital to a friend or family member.
“In contrast, our analysis showed that when information flow was poor, patients were angry even if their stays were short,” Press Ganey writes.
Press Ganey uses the concept of Likelihood to Recommend as their measurement of consumer loyalty, stating that “this variable reflects the extent to which providers have met patients’ needs—including their need for peace of mind resulting from compassionate and coordinated care and optimal clinical outcomes.” If a patient is willing to recommend the healthcare facility to a friend or family member, this is a good indicator that they were pleased with their experience and are likely to return for care themselves.
The note concludes by stating that all of the key factors in consumer loyalty—coordinated care, empathy, open communication—are all very much in the control of the physicians and consistent with organization financial goals.
“The best news is that these factors are completely consistent with values that inspire professional pride among physicians, nurses and other personnel.”
Tagged Care CoordinationClinical AnalyticsQuality Of Care


