Poor Communication Hinders Population Health Management

April 08, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 08, 2015 - Effective population health management relies on the seamless, coordinated work of a multi-faceted care team, yet the majority of clinicians feel unable to communicate with their peers in a timely, meaningful way, according to a new survey from Harris Poll and PerfectServe.
Fragmented technologies, unclear workflows, and the burdens of HIPAA led more than ninety percent of clinicians to believe that interoperable, secure, mobile, communications, as well as a greater reliance on healthcare data analytics, are vital for building a population health management program that ensures high quality, coordinated care.
The widespread dissatisfaction and concern reported in the poll of nearly 1000 physicians, nurses, care managers, and other hands-on clinical staff reinforces the importance of good communications and the financial consequences of confusion. Not only do clinicians become frustrated when their time is wasted with irrelevant voicemails and unanswered text messages, but there is a measurable impact on the patient, too.
Communication barriers can delay discharges and transitions, say 76 percent of clinicians, especially those in the hospital setting. A lack of patient data can delay even the most routine care, add 69 percent of respondents, while a similar number experience disruptions during a consult or service when they receive lower priority calls, pages, and messages that may not be related to the task at hand. Nearly half of hospitalists say that they frequently receive communications related to patients who aren’t even under their care; a similar number admitted that they often don’t know the right person to contact when a question or issue arises.
Dig Deeper
ACOs Lack Resources, Skills for Population Health Management
Nurses Play Collaborative Role in Care Coordination, Planning
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
Part of the problem, according to the respondents, is that current communications technologies are both too numerous and not sophisticated enough to manage patient information, provide data, and answer queries. While organizations are investing in patient portals, mobile messaging, and video conferencing for their patients, the basic building blocks of health IT within the office are coming up short.
Forty percent of clinicians believe that EHRs are insufficient tools for coordinating population health management between providers, while more than half of nurses feel that EHRs do not allow them to effectively communicate with physicians. EHRs are the method of choice for only 12 percent of communication needs.
Instead of using EHR technology, clinicians are turning to mobile devices in droves. Eighty-eight percent believe that mobile communication is a critical aspect of a population health management program, yet four out of five organizations do not have a single, unified mobile messaging platform that is secure and HIPAA compliant. As a result, at least twenty percent of providers have received unsecured voice mails or messages on personal smartphones that contain sensitive patient personal health information, a clear violation of patient privacy regulations.
“Policy makers, hospitals and health systems are rightly focused on improving population health, but these survey results demonstrate a very real pain point that needs to be addressed before the industry will ever succeed in making that a reality,” said Dr. Jennifer DeBruler, medical director of Advocate Health Care’s Contact Center. “Without unified communication across providers, boosting population health, and realizing the associated cost and care benefits, will be impossible.”
Despite the relatively chaotic state of affairs, healthcare providers are committed to making population health management work.   Seventy-six percent of clinicians are acquainted with their organization’s plans for population health, even if it doesn’t always receive top-level funding.
Healthcare providers are actively building partnerships with other members of the care continuum, with 59 percent partnering with payers, 52 percent establishing relationships with EHR and technology vendors, and 33 percent allying with a population health management strategy consultant to help achieve their goals.
The majority of providers, 87 percent, believe that smoother communication on its own will not be effective unless meaningful patient data is also available at the right time and place. More robust clinical analytics and data crunching technologies are a crucial piece of the puzzle for those providers, while an even greater number think that interoperability between data creation and storage technologies will be necessary to supplement current population health management efforts.
“The diversity of clinical communications technologies in hospitals has exploded in recent years, but in many cases these mechanisms are not helping clinicians do their jobs better – in fact, they are creating more barriers to collaboration in the care of their patients,” said Terry Edwards, president and CEO of PerfectServe. “This survey reflects the sentiments of providers who share a deep commitment to making healthcare better and improving population health, and confirms that robust secure communications will be critical to meeting their needs.”
Tagged Care CoordinationPatient CarePopulation Health Management


