Is Gene Therapy a False Trail for Precision Medicine Research?

August 22, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 22, 2016 - Gene therapy researchers aiming to create precision medicine treatments may be heading in the wrong direction, according to an editorial published last month in the Journal of the American Medical Association, and should not be the only areas of study to receive large amounts of funding from organizations like the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
Major research organizations with millions of dollars to spend should cast a wider net when choosing which studies to fund, and should trade an emphasis on immediate, concrete results for a more open approach that allows for the exploration of additional scientific theories.
“For several decades now the biomedical research community has pursued a narrative positing that a combination of ever-deeper knowledge of subcellular biology, especially genetics, coupled with information technology will lead to transformative improvements in health care and human health,” write Michael J. Joyner, MD, Nigel Paneth, MD, MPH, and John P. A. Ioannidis, MD, DSc, hailing from the Mayo Clinic, Michigan State University, and Stanford University.
Gene therapy and stem cell therapy research projects have received an incredible amount of attention in recent years, as advances in clinical technology and health information technology open up new big data vistas for investigators to explore, the authors continued.
The number of academic journal articles related to terms including gene therapy, regenerative medicine, stem cells, or genomics have increased significantly.  Between 1974 and 2014, the number of articles indexed in PubMed on an annual basis increased by 410 percent, but the number of studies related to the term “genome” skyrocketed 2127 percent.
READ MORE: Chan, Zuckerberg Donate $10M to UCSF Precision Medicine Lab
There has been a similar explosion in research papers related to gene therapy and stem cell therapy.  While the number of articles indexed by PubMed between 1994 and 2014 increased by 175 percent annually, articles related to gene therapy rose by 874 percent, and those involving stem cells increased by 752 percent.
“Apparently a large number of scientists either believe in the potential of these topics or feel compelled to work on them, recognizing that these topics constitute a major locus of important science, financial support, recognition, and prospects for a successful career,” the authors commented.
Funding opportunities are a major driver of this narrow focus on popular topics, the editorial argues.  In 2016, about $15 billion of the NIH’s $26 billion funding budget could be linked to research on these topics. 
Whether the research is driven by funding or the funding is fueled by the promises and progress of research is debatable.
Either way, the focus on certain narrow topics within the field of genetics may be crowding out opportunities to explore new avenues for the development of precision medicine, the article argues – and the results produced by researchers so far are questionable.
READ MORE: Point of Care Diagnostics Usher in Era of Personalized Medicine
“The prospects of effective treatment based on stem cells have been challenged in comprehensive reviews of the available trials. For instance, in congestive heart failure, improvements in cardiac function have been observed only in industry-sponsored studies, and a positive relationship has been noted between effect size and the number of experimental design flaws.”
While the International Society for Stem Cell Research has released “anti-hype” guidelines to promote responsible communications about the promises and impacts of therapies related to this field of medical science, public excitement over these issues may be steering the research community in a less-than-optimal direction.
Furthermore, the authors added, the industry buzz around the potential of electronic health records to revolutionize targeted population health management and patient outcomes may be inflated.  A lack of standards – and standardized metrics of success – also complicate the problem.
“Although it is difficult to argue for a return to paper records, any claim of future transformation of the medical record should include well-defined accountability and review mechanisms,” the article says. “Otherwise, the health care system may become hostage, wasting increasing resources to continuously upgrade electronic technology without really helping patients.”
The promised clinical and financial benefits of EHRs and associated big data analytics have “largely failed to materialize,” the editorial asserts, even after billions of dollars in investments at the federal level.  The well-known challenges of data interoperability, integrity, and accuracy limit the usefulness of EHRs for patient care.
READ MORE: Precision Medicine Study Highlights Role of Machine Learning
These issues may also pose problems for the use of electronic health records as the basis for projects within the Precision Medicine Initiative, as the American Medical Informatics Association and the PMI Taskforce itself both pointed out earlier this year.
The dual missteps of prioritizing genetics research with little real evidence of its import and relying on sub-par EHR technology as a data source without proper attention to integrity and accuracy are stunting the growth of the precision medicine ecosystem, say Joyner, Paneth, and Ioannidis. 
The clinical research community should reevaluate its direction – and the funding that supports its work – if the industry is to see true progress towards precision care.
“Public funders such as NIH should expand the funding for basic, ‘blue sky’ science for which it is impossible to set, predict, and promise specific deliverables,” the authors suggest. “In so doing, NIH should fund many more high-risk, unconventional ideas instead of supporting the same familiar highly funded research fronts. However, novel funding mechanisms like NIH Pioneer Awards are currently only a tiny fraction of the total budget.”
In situations where NIH funds support translational or preclinical research that aims for specific deliverables, an independent assessment body should evaluate whether or not those objectives have been achieved, and if there is any measurable public health benefit associated with the research.
“Criteria such as number of publications, citations, prizes, and recognition are irrelevant as these are simply self-rewarding artifacts of the system,” the authors remarked. “After several decades of substantial investment, the fundamental question is whether these big ideas have improved quality of life and life expectancy, by how much, for how many, and for whom. These are public dollars that should benefit the many, not the few.”
The NIH may wish to reconsider how it divvies up its limited funding budgets, and might consider leaving deliverables-based research projects to the private sector instead, the authors conclude. 
Using public money to fund open-ended “blue-sky” initiatives may produce benefits that have thus far eluded the tightly-focuses genetics arena, and make the best use of available resources to chart new pathways towards precision medicine goals.
How Precision Medicine Will Shift from Research to Clinical Care
Cancer Moonshot Flags Basic Big Data Woes of Precision Medicine
Tagged EHR AnalyticsGenomicsMedical ResearchPersonalized MedicinePrecision Medicine


