Clinical, performance analytics key to accountable care

January 10, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 10, 2014 - Health IT that enables clinical, financial, and performance analytics is critical to the success of accountable care, according to IDC Health Insights.  Providers can no longer just rely on their EHRs as a primary technological tool to drive better outcomes, but must embrace an advanced suite of data-driven systems if they want to realize the potential of the Triple Aim and the cost savings of accountable care organizations (ACOs).
The Triple Aim, embraced by federal initiatives like the EHR Incentive Programs as well as the Institute for Healthcare Improvement, urges providers to use information technology to improve patient satisfaction, manage the health of populations as a whole, and reduce skyrocketing costs throughout the system.  ACOs hope to achieve these goals by asking providers to share financial risk based on the quality of their performance and the measurement of patient outcomes.
Data analytics has become the key to helping providers measure and accomplish their value-based care responsibilities.  An integrated network of IT packages, including practice management, billing, health information exchange, and population health management systems, are part of the basic technological foundation now required to extract actionable insights from raw clinical and financial data.
“The integration of clinical data (EMR encounter, lab, pharmacy) and claims data (clinical and financial) offers the ability to create a 360-degree view of a patient’s and population’s health status,” the report says.  “Increasingly, healthcare organizations are identifying nonclinical drivers of adverse events and are incorporating non-healthcare data. For example, an asthma patient who continued to return to the emergency room was discovered to have considerable mold and dust in his home, so a cleaning service was deployed to create a clean environment. As a result, the patient’s ER use dropped to zero.”
Dig Deeper
Early Adopters Question Usefulness, Maturity of AI in Healthcare
Understanding the Many V’s of Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Business Intelligence Tools Bring Insights to Organ Donation Network
Stretching the definition of clinical care that far is a new trend for providers, and one that IDC believes will continue.  Providers and patients are both reaching for new sources of communication and information sharing, including mHealth apps, remote monitoring, and social networks like Twitter and Facebook.  “Patients with similar conditions are creating chat rooms where they can discuss treatments, side effects, and outcomes,” says the brief. “Healthcare organizations are in the research stage of determining how social media can be used in personalized care planning.”
But accountable care can only succeed if providers find a way to document and use this data as part of their performance reporting.  “Physicians are often shocked at how low they score on quality metrics because ‘they always do a foot exam on their diabetic patients.’  While that may be true, if the foot exam for a diabetic is not documented, it cannot be counted,” IDC warns. Learning to document data that might not be captured in the current workflow is just as important as integrating new data streams to accurately assess an organization’s performance and therefore receive the reimbursements that it is entitled to.
Such a change will require significant investment from executive leadership and a continued focus on meeting quality improvement and cost reduction goals.  “Most of the cost improvements made to date represent process improvements such as keeping patients out of the inpatient setting and diverting patients seeking inappropriate emergency room use,” IDC explains. “Healthcare organizations will have to improve clinical outcomes and engage patients (particularly those with chronic conditions) in order to sustain savings, continue quality improvement, and manage risk.”
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsAnalytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceQuality Of Care


