Medicare Proposes Coverage of Yearly Lung Cancer Screenings

November 11, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
An additional 9 million Medicare patients may be eligible for lung cancer screenings under a new CMS proposal to cover the costs of the test.
November 11, 2014 - CMS has announced that Medicare intends to provide financial coverage for yearly lung cancer screenings intended to detect the early development of the disease in current and former heavy smokers.  The decision may help prevent up to 20 percent of the 160,000 annual deaths from the third-most common form of cancer, and could expand the preventative care measure to more than nine million older patients in the United States.
The criteria for coverage require a patient to be between 55 and 74 years old, be a current smoker or a former smoker who has quit within the last fifteen years, have no signs or symptoms of lung disease, and have a history of at least 30 “pack-years.”  One “pack-year” is equivalent to smoking twenty cigarettes per day for one year.  In the announcement, CMS stresses the use of patient education to highlight the importance of adhering to the yearly screening program as well as ensuring that patients understand the risks of the low-dose CT scan, including radiation exposure and false-positives.
The screening test costs between $250 and $300 per patient, which has raised concerns that the program will add more than $9 billion in costs to Medicare over the next five years.  However, the screenings could double the number of cancers caught in early enough stages for effective treatment from 15 percent to 33 percent, says Joshua Roth of the Fred Hutchison Cancer Research Center in Seattle.  Averaging out the financial impact of the program would add just $3 per month per beneficiary to Medicare costs.
The proposition to offer the screenings contradicts the recommendations of the Medicare Evidence Development and Coverage Advisory Committee (MEDCAC), which stated in April of 2014 that they had low confidence that the benefits of such an effort would outweigh the potential harm.  The findings did not sit well with a number of professional societies and lung cancer advocacy groups, many of which quickly condemned the results of the meeting.
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
CMS Public Health Data Repository Will Aid Quality Reporting
“Without national Medicare coverage for CT lung cancer screening, seniors face a two-tier coverage system in which those with private insurance will be covered for these exams and many of their lives saved, while Medicare beneficiaries are left with lesser access to these exams and placed at increased risk of dying from lung cancer. CMS needs to move for full national coverage as the USPSTF recommendations would indicate,” said Ella Kazerooni, MD, chair of the American College of Radiology Lung Cancer Screening Committee.
Lung cancer is generally asymptomatic in its early stages, and is diagnosed after metastasis more than half the time.  The five-year survival rate when the disease is detected after spreading to other parts of the body is less than four percent.  When cancer is diagnosed during its earliest stages, the five-year survival rate jumps to 53.5 percent, says data from the National Cancer Institute.
Tagged Patient CarePopulation Health Management


