Mass. grants foster clinical analytics, patient engagement

June 30, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 30, 2014 - Over the next fifteen years, the Partnership for Community Health is planning to dole out $90 million in grants to Massachusetts hospitals in order to support care coordination, access to care, and health information technology.  With more than $10 million already disbursed in the first two years of the program, the collaboration between Partners HealthCare, Neighborhood Health Plan, and the Massachusetts League of Community Health Centers has reached all 49 community hospitals across the Bay State.
“These grants help to support and accelerate important innovations in health care – the type of innovations that can improve access, coordination, and slow cost growth,” said Gary L. Gottlieb, MD President and CEO of Partners HealthCare. “And, we know that some of the best and most transformative innovations in patient-centered care are developed at our community health centers right here in Massachusetts.”
“This level of private investment in community health centers is unprecedented – both locally and nationally,” added League President and CEO James W. Hunt, Jr. “Equally important, the longevity and vision of this initiative will help to sustain and expand primary care innovation for generations of Massachusetts residents across the health center network and beyond.”
The program turned competitive in 2014, with 35 organizations winning $6 million for projects centered around organizing data, improving patient engagement, and facilitating health information exchange.  At Fenway Community Health Center, nearly $500,000 will be used towards providing iPads for patients to use in the waiting room to fill out health status questionnaires that can prompt discussion about issues such as alcohol use or nutrition with their providers during the consult.
Dig Deeper
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
CT Medical Society Announces New Health Information Exchange
“Early studies point to the effectiveness of using technology for patient reporting,” said Fenway Community Health Center Medical Director Alex Gonzalez. “In many cases, the technology helps to elicit more accurate and detailed responses from patients about a range of topics, including physical symptoms, depression, substance abuse, and domestic violence.”
Fenway will also work with five other health centers on an $800,000 project to create a central repository for quality, utilization and cost data in order to foster clinical and financial analytics.  The database will help the organizations to allocate resources appropriately and allow the medical centers to embrace accountable care and value-based reimbursement programs.
Tagged Care CoordinationHealthcare Data AnalyticsQuality Of Care


