92% of Providers to Use CMS Chronic Disease Management Program

February 27, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 27, 2015 - More than ninety percent of healthcare providers are planning to use the new chronic disease management reimbursement structure offered by CMS in 2015, finds a survey from Kryptiq.  The poll of nearly 200 providers indicates widespread interest in taking advantage of Medicare’s new approach to value-based payments for improving population health management techniques, and appears to add credence to the notion that healthcare reforms can be driven by providing reasonable financial incentives for investing in new patient care workflows.
Starting January 1, providers treating Medicare patients with two or more chronic diseases became eligible for a monthly payment of $42.60 per beneficiary if they are certified EHR users, deliver a core set of chronic disease management services, and provide at least 20 minutes of additional follow-up over the phone, through telehealth services, or by some other method that does not include face-to-face time.  CMS developed the new CPT code for chronic care management (CCM) in 2013, and added specific payment information at the end of 2014.
“The survey results provide additional evidence that the transition from volume to value is underway,” noted Cynthia Burghard, Research Director at IDC Health Insights. “For the first time, the Department of Health and Human Services has developed a timetable with specific milestones and thresholds detailing Medicare’s shift toward new value-based payment models. The CCM program serves as an extension of health policy and complements ongoing changes to provider reimbursement.”
Three quarters of participants in the survey said that they plan to begin integrating the chronic disease management program into their workflow within the next six months, and an additional 16 percent indicated that they will meet the CCM requirements within a year.  However, nearly half of the participants are concerned that they do not currently have adequate resources, including time and staffing, to take advantage of the offering.
Dig Deeper
Dental Care is the Missing Piece of Population Health Management
Claims Data Analytics Show Diabetes Has Third Largest Health Impact
Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
Additionally, fifteen percent believe that they do not have sufficient EHR and population health management technology in place to meet the program’s requirements.  CMS originally proposed that providers must be using a 2014 edition certified EHR to quality for CCM participation, but later modified the requirement, following similar slackening of standards for attestation to the EHR Incentive Programs.
“In response to public comments indicating that very few practices have adopted a 2014-certified EHR at this time, CMS will require the version of the certified EHR that is in use on December 31 of the prior calendar year for the EHR Incentive Programs to bill for CCM services,” CMS said in its announcement.  The provision may allow for wider participation in the CCM scheme, but providers still using outdated EHR technology may not have the capabilities to truly enact chronic disease management programs to their full potential.
“It can be tough to hear that your EHR implementation, the result of much organizational blood, sweat, and tears, is inadequate for emerging models of value-based care such as chronic care management,” stated Malcolm Costello, General Manager of Population Health at Kryptiq. “Fortunately, many providers are already extending their staff into care coordination activities in pursuit of other value-based initiatives such as pay for performance or patient-centered medical home.”
Tagged Accountable CareChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


