Preventable Hospital Readmissions Fall Dramatically Across US

September 14, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 14, 2016 - A concerted nationwide effort to improve care quality and reduce preventable hospital readmissions has produced a rapid drop in the number of patients who return to the hospital within 30 days of discharge, boasts new data from CMS.
In a blog post this week, CMS officials revealed that 43 states have seen readmission rates fall by more than 5 percent since 2010.  Eleven states have more than doubled that achievement, managing to slash the preventable readmission rate by over ten percent over the past six years.
“Potentially avoidable hospital readmissions that occur within 30 days of a patient’s initial discharge are estimated to account for more than $17 billion in Medicare expenditures annually,” wrote Deputy Chief of Staff Tim Gronninger and CMS Principal Deputy Administrator and CMO Patrick Conway, MD.
“Not only are readmissions costly, but they are often a sign of poor quality care. Many readmissions can be avoided through improvements in care, such as making sure that patients leave the hospital with appropriate medications, instructions for follow-up care, and follow-up appointments scheduled to make sure their recovery stays on track.”
The Readmissions Reduction Program (RRP) was among the many care quality provisions included in the Affordable Care Act, Conway and Gronninger explained. 
READ MORE: Avoidable Admissions for Long-Term Care Dual Eligibles Down 31%
Since October of 2012, the program has used Medicare payment adjustments to galvanize hospitals into developing initiatives to reduce preventable readmissions by targeting above-expected rates of 30-day readmissions for patients with heart problems, pneumonia, and certain joint replacement procedures.
In 2014, more than 2600 hospitals handed over up to 3 percent of their Medicare reimbursements after exceeding the 30-day readmissions threshold, totaling approximately $428 million in fines.  The average penalty was just over 0.6 percent of Medicare payments, but close to five hundred facilities saw cuts of more than one percent.
In addition to the penalty program, CMS has developed initiatives like the Partnership for Patients, which has set the goal of reducing preventable hospital readmissions by 20 percent compared to 2010 levels by encouraging patients and providers to collaborate for smoother transitions, increased communication, and more overall engagement.
“The data show that these efforts are working,” Conway and Gronninger said. “Between 2010 and 2015, readmission rates fell by 8 percent nationally,” bringing the country close to the halfway mark of meeting the Partnership for Patients goal.
Every state except Vermont has seen a measurable reduction in readmissions.  Vermont has basically held steady over the study period, with a 0.07 percent increase that translates to just 21 additional readmissions over its 2010 baseline.
READ MORE: FDA Antibiotic Stewardship Tool Offers Centralized Data Resource
Hawaii and New Jersey lead the nation with 13.4 percent and 13.3 percent reductions respectively.  Arizona, Delaware, Illinois, Maryland, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, and South Dakota join them on the list of states that have reduced more than ten percent of their preventable readmissions.
In 2015 alone, Medicare beneficiaries have avoided around 100,000 preventable readmissions compared to what they would have experienced without these quality improvement efforts.  An HHS estimate says that Medicare beneficiaries have dodged a total of approximately 565,000 readmissions since the start of the decade.
Improved care coordination strategies and big data analytics technologies have given providers the tools they need to continue making progress.  
At Kaiser Permanente, researchers saw a 19 percent reduction in 30-day readmissions for heart failure patients who followed up with their primary care providers within one week of leaving the hospital, either by phone or in person. 
Care managers, nurses, and physician assistants were in charge of conducting the follow-up conversations, which focused on ensuring patients understood their care plans, had access to their medications, and started to establish healthy lifestyle routines.
READ MORE: VA to Get “Aggressive” with Hospital Quality Improvement Program
Care coordination planning also reduced the preventable hospital readmission rate for patients with mental and behavioral health issues by 9 percent at Brigham and Women’s Hospital between 2010 and 2013.  A team-based effort to screen patients for symptoms of delirium, alcohol withdrawal, and heightened suicide risk helped to educate providers and ensure that patients received high quality care and appropriate services.
Providers participating in the patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model can also lower preventable readmissions by delivering enhanced care coordination to patients returning from the hospital setting.  In Michigan, follow-up calls and home visits from a social worker made certain that patients had everything they needed to recover from a hospitalization without a premature return to the inpatient facility.  
These care coordination strategies may become increasingly important to providers looking to engage in accountable care arrangements that include financial risk for poor patient outcomes.  And as MACRA’s upcoming quality care provisions start to exert pressure on the healthcare industry, metrics like the preventable readmission rate may take on even more significance.
“The Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program is just one part of the Administration’s broader strategy to reform the health care system by  paying providers for what works, unlocking health care data, and finding new ways to coordinate and integrate care to improve quality,” said Conway and Gronninger.
“The goal of all of these efforts is to spend our health care dollars more wisely to promote better care for Medicare beneficiaries and other Americans across the country.”
How to Get Started with a Population Health Management Program
Preventing Big Data Pain Points During a Healthcare Encounter
Tagged Care QualityHospital QualityHospital ReadmissionsPopulation Health Management


