Population Health Management Requires Moving Beyond the EHR

December 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Population health management techniques must be based in bigger data than the EHR can provide, say the ONC and JASON in a new report.
December 03, 2014 - Translating the broad principles of population health management into truly individualized wellness for each and every patient will require a much heavier reliance on healthcare data and analytics than the typical EHR can provide, claims a new JASON report commissioned by HHS.  Providers must develop the capacity to perform advanced data analytics by drawing together multiple sources of clinical, social, genetic, and economic data that produces a rich and robust portrait of how the individual interacts with his or her environment to pursue good health outside of the physician office’s walls.
“Health primarily happens outside the doctor’s office—playing out in the arenas where we live, learn, work and play. In fact, a minority of our overall health is the result of the health care we receive,” write National Coordinator Karen DeSalvo, MD, MPH, MSc, Jon White, MD, and Michael Painter, Senior Program Officer at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation in an accompanying blog post on Health IT Buzz. “If we’re to have an accurate picture of health, we need more than what is currently captured in the electronic health record. There has been an explosion of data that could help with all kinds of decisions about health. Right now, though, we do not have the capability to capture and share that data with those who make decisions that impact health—including individuals, health care providers and communities.”
JASON, an independent advisory group of researchers and scientists that provides analysis and reporting to various federal agencies, worked in partnership with the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), the ONC, and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to develop the findings.  The report highlights several familiar goals for the healthcare industry as it learns to embrace big data: the development of data standards, a focus on interoperability, the adoption of open APIs that encourage innovation, and a patient-centered effort to produce, gather, analyze, and act upon data from across the care continuum and beyond.
“Data sharing is a critical piece of this equation,” DeSalvo and her co-authors state. “While we need infrastructure to capture and organize this data, we also need to ensure that individuals, health care professionals and community leaders can access and exchange this data, and use it to make decisions that improve health. Broadening data beyond the four walls of the doctors’ office will give health care professionals a more holistic view of their patient’s health. Sharing that data among members of the health care team will also lead to greater care coordination. Ensuring this data is used in meaningful ways will of course require training our health care workforce to a higher level of quantitative literacy.”
Dig Deeper
HHS Doles Out $87M to Promote Health IT, Analytics Adoption
EHR Vendors Increasingly Offering Population Health Tools
PGHD, Genomic Data Predicted to Power Clinical Decision Support
In order to continue the development of analytics within the healthcare system, the report recommends that HHS take the lead in making and enacting policies that foster data-driven decision making while providing a framework for measuring progress.  HHS should also pay close attention to the adoption and proliferation of industry-wide data standards and encourage the use of open APIs for developers.  Federal agencies can also help spur community involvement and leverage the power of non-profit groups by developing challenges, goals, standards for products that achieve “stamps of approval,” and training for healthcare and social workers in new methods of engaging patients in their care.
“We’re excited by the potential to take this emerging data and turn it into useable information to build a Culture of Health—a nation where everyone has the opportunity to live longer, healthier lives,” DeSalvo writes. “We encourage everyone — consumers, providers, employers, purchasers, health IT developers and others—to take a look at the report and share your comments. We look forward to hearing from you.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataPopulation Health Management


