To build a population health management program, start anywhere

June 25, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 25, 2014 - Pulling together the building blocks for a robust population health management program can be an expensive and difficult proposition.  From infrastructure investments to EHR upgrades to the increased demands on clinicians and staff, retooling an organization to meet the high level of engagement and outreach required for more accountable care can be a challenge.
While many hospitals continue to pour big bucks into clinical and financial analytics technologies, others are struggling just to stay afloat in a changing reimbursement landscape, and don’t feel capable of making large-scale investments. But hospitals that want to move into population health shouldn’t be put off by vendors who present a laundry list of “critical” technologies.  Just like the Mayo Clinic found earlier this year with hospital readmissions, a little bit of effort goes a long way when it comes to organizational improvements.
“For a lot of people, creating a population health management infrastructure seems intimidating.  They think they have to buy everything all at once, but that’s not necessarily the most efficient strategy,” said Peter McClennen, President of Population Health Management at health IT giant Allscripts, to HealthITAnalytics.  “You can start anywhere, so it doesn’t have to be quite so expensive.  The strategy that we’ve taken at Allscripts is to have our population health management technologies live above the EHR, and all of them work very well with other vendors, too.  Cerner, Epic, NextGen, eClinicalWorks – it’s important to work with everyone, because there are hundreds of different EHRs on the market.”
“If a population health solution is only designed to work with one EHR, it will leave out the entire rest of the community,” he added.  “The US population is a distributed population.  We’re not all inside a lockbox of care. Patients move from facility to facility.  Sometimes their insurance plans dictate movement; sometimes their chronic conditions dictate movement.  Sometimes just where they work and where they live are in different places, and that dictates movement.”
Working with a geographically fractured patient landscape can make it difficult for providers to identify their highest-risk populations and target programs to meet their needs.  Sufficient revenues from increasingly choosy patients are harder to come by, leaving few resources left over to invest in advanced analytics dashboards and risk-stratification technologies.  But shifting towards accountable care can also boost revenues, even if it requires a little bit of up-front investment.  Starting with a few of the basics can get the ball rolling, and eventually free up some extra cash to smooth the way towards a more advanced ecosystem of health IT and engagement.
READ MORE: Artificial Intelligence a “Low Priority” for Healthcare Orgs in 2018
“Some organizations need to start with a very basic care management program,” McClennen explains.  “So if you’ve been given a group of diabetics from your payer, you are sharing risk to help manage those diabetics in a more costly, high quality way.  You might just need to create care management protocols and communications with those patients, so that would be a great way to start off a client in that regard.”
“Or maybe you want to get connected with your partners.  Maybe you have a practice that is on a different EHR than your hospital.  You want to take risk, but the first thing you have to do is create a shared clinical record.  You could start with an HIE solution, or with patient engagement. Everybody’s doing patient portals because of Stage 2 Meaningful Use.  You may want to start with care protocols for the patient to see online,” he adds, which will help secure a slice of the remaining incentive dollars and get patients involved with their own care.
Providers seeking smaller, problem-specific solutions should still keep the big picture in mind, however.  Interoperability remains an important goal for the healthcare system, and choosing products that work with existing infrastructure while leaving future options open is key for positioning an organization for long-term viability and success.
“A lot of vendors will ask you to just replace everything that you have and throw everything out.  All your investments, all your time,” McClennen says.  “That doesn’t make much sense.  If you have things you want to leverage, if you’re successful and happy with them, that’s great.  If you don’t like them, we’d love the opportunity to replace them, but if you have them, let’s connect to them.  Let’s be interoperable and work that way.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


