What Are the Clinical Analytics Lessons from EHR Adoption Data?

December 08, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
EHR adopters are largely driven by penalties and incentives. Could clinical analytics benefit from the same?
December 08, 2014 - EHR adoption is a critical precursor for the development of a health IT infrastructure that is capable of conducting clinical analytics.  Without a source of electronic data to draw from, it is nearly impossible to visualize larger pools of data, flag patients based on certain characteristics, and achieve the promises of accountable care and population health management.  EHR adoption has long since reached its “tipping point,” according to the ONC, but as new data delves into the reasons that healthcare providers have made the leap towards EHR adoption, what can we learn about the potential future for the implementation of more advanced analytics capabilities?
In a new data brief, the ONC providers more insight into the landscape of EHR adoption after the first few years of the EHR Incentive Programs.  Meaningful use has been the single most important driver of health IT development and purchasing in recent memory, and its carrot-and-stick structure holds some clues when it comes to motivating providers to meet federal goals.  The data, based on the 2013 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Physician Workflow Survey, showed 59% of providers had adopted a meaningful use-capable EHR, while a further ten percent was planning to do so.
Of the physicians who adopted an EHR during the incentive phase of Stage 1 meaningful use, 62% were majorly influenced by the money they could collect by meeting the requirements.  Thirty six percent were also motivated by the hope of fluid electronic data exchange, and a similar number looked at trusted colleagues who were using EHRs and decided to mimic them.  Among providers who were not using EHRs at the time of the survey, their feelings were largely the same.  Incentive payments, data exchange, and the example of their peers were significant drivers of interest in EHR systems.
Unsurprisingly, physicians who had no intention of adopting EHRs cited a lack of time and financial resources, inadequate staffing, and privacy and security concerns.  A smaller number added that no available EHR system truly fits their specialty.
Dig Deeper
Physician-Level Data May Not Reduce Opioid Prescription Rates
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
EHR Analytics Track C. Diff Patients to Flag Infection Trends
For clinical analytics advocates, both the pros and cons of health IT adoption seem very familiar.  The financial incentives and penalties related to data analytics adoption are much less codified and clear than the regulations of the EHR Incentive Programs, but there certainly are monetary benefits and quality penalties associated with the ability to stratify risk, predict high cost patients, and provide effective preventative care and chronic disease management.  They are largely driven by cost-conscious payers at the moment, but as the stages of meaningful use advance to encompass more of these population health features, CMS and the ONC will be keeping a sharper eye on metrics that require more advanced health IT capabilities.
Could clinical analytics benefit from its own separate incentive program that rewards population health management and penalizes poor outcomes?  Or will the EHR Incentive Programs provide enough structure and motivation in its latter states to prompt sufficient growth?  With Stage 2 in full swing and the proliferation of analytics frameworks and adoption models provided by HIMSS and other organizations, the industry is starting to lay the groundwork towards robust analytics in a variety of ways.  As providers accomplish analytics goals, they may wish to look back to the pitfalls and successes of the early parts of the EHR Incentive Programs to provide clues to motivating healthcare organizations to move forward towards true accountable care.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsEHR Optimization


