$5M Precision Medicine Grant Integrates Genomics, Big Data

February 08, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 08, 2016 - Precision medicine is getting a $5 million boost at research organizations in Pennsylvania as the three-year Commonwealth Universal Research Enhancement (CURE) project gets underway. 
The grant will fund the discovery of potential breast cancer and lung cancer treatments as part of the Big Data For Better Health (BD4BH) project centered at the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University.
Gregory Cooper, MD, PhD, professor and vice chair of biomedical informatics at the University of Pittsburgh (UPitt), and Ziv Bar-Joseph, PhD, professor of computational biology at Carnegie Mellon, will focus on the two common cancers as a way to develop more advanced big data analytics techniques that combine clinical and genomics data.
“The main focus – and the main unique aspect of this program – is the idea that in addition to a lot of genomics data coming in, we also need to use clinical data to make decisions,” said Bar-Joseph to HealthITAnalytics.com. 
“In some sense, that’s much harder to access than genomics data, because most of it is tied up in the EHR and not very well organized.”
READ MORE: “All of Us” Precision Medicine Program Enters Beta Testing
Precision medicine researchers across the nation – and around the world – have been working diligently to uncover more and more connections between a patient’s genetic makeup and his or her response to specific drugs, treatment options, or disease vectors.
But poor health data interoperability, a lack of widely-accepted data standards, and unpredictable variation in data integrity makes it very difficult to work with the enormous data sets required to extract actionable insights.
The process is complicated even further when researchers can’t match DNA sequencing results to actual clinical outcomes.  The National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the FDA are making a concerted effort to change the fragmented, siloed landscape of earlier precision medicine efforts by developing a collaborative, nationwide repository to hold patient data, demolishing barriers to data access for top experts in the field.
The BD4BH initiative has already acknowledged that this problem can be fatal to precision medicine research efforts, and is making clinical data integration a priority for its work.
“We have at least five years of data on many of these patients, and sometimes much more than that,” Bar-Joseph said.   “So the goal would be to take the genomics data that we can use for example, to predict survival, and try to link it to the very little clinical data that we have in order to make more specific recommendations.”
READ MORE: Six Pediatric Hospitals Create Personalized Medicine Coalition
“For example, if we see a population that was treated with a specific drug and improved, can we then make predictions about what is the right drug for an individual?  Or if we see that some individuals survive longer than others, can we flag genomic features that maybe related to this longer survival time?”
Uncovering meaningful correlations between clinical outcomes and the genomic fingerprints of patient populations is an enormously messy task, he added.  “All of this data needs to be represented in a structured way so that we can much more easily write algorithms to highlight what is relevant to our research.”
Using machine learning techniques to crunch genomic data can help speed up the process of identifying patterns that human researchers may miss.  The process is dependent on including as many patients as possible in a cohort, said Bar-Joseph, so that researchers don’t make assumptions based on narrow sets of data.
“There has been a lot of focus on mutation analysis when researchers conduct gene-wide association studies, which hope to identify individual variations that may be associated with different diseases,” he explained.  “But the problem with this work is that either you don’t find a lot of them, or they don’t necessarily correlate with a large number of patients.”
“One of the reasons this is less than effective could be because people have been focused too much on individual events rather than looking at groups.  So an important aspect of our project is trying to find events that occur together in order to provide more statistical confidence that we are really seeing something rather than just identifying some variant that may or may not be associated with a particular disease.”
READ MORE: Machine Learning Identifies Ovarian Cancer with 91% Accuracy
Precision medicine has had great success in the field of oncology, and that is where Cooper and Bar-Joseph hope to continue to make progress.
“We will investigate breast and lung cancer as clinical domains to develop the methods and software tools; however, the methods will be generalizable to other diseases,” Cooper said in November. “The basic approach will be to process raw data, such as gene sequence and expression data, to derive highly informative biological patterns in the data that are then used to predict patient outcomes. We believe these biological patterns will predict outcomes significantly better than would using the raw data directly, and we plan to test this hypothesis.”
Together, UPitt and Carnegie Mellon, along with the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, hope to be able to automate the process of discovering solid relationships between a patient’s genetic makeup and the best treatment options for cancers and other devastating diseases.
“If we know that this set of genes works together with this drug, or this pathway, or this set of events happens together and this mutation affects this gene expression…even if it doesn’t directly relate to clinical recommendations right now, we’re broadening our understanding of genomics as a whole,” Bar-Joseph said.
“Ultimately, we’d like to make this actionable.  If a patient is diagnosed with breast cancer, for example, the goal would be to take the biopsy and perform the sequencing and expression analysis in addition to any immediately recommended treatment.”
With the cost of gene sequencing dropping rapidly as next-generation technologies enable quick and reliable genetic testing, Bar-Joseph believes that the combination of big data analytics and DNA sequencing will become a standard option in the clinical toolkit. 
“I think patients will have this done multiple times, and it may become a more or less routine procedure,” he predicts.  “Once we have the methods that tell us what we should focus on for a patient’s specific needs, then it’s relatively easy to profile the sample that the patient providers in order to recommend the ideal line of treatment.”
“With cancer, there are often multiple options, and one of the big questions precision medicine is trying to answer is which one should be assigned to an individual.  This is one way, at least, to determine that.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation Health ManagementPrecision Medicine


