How a Shortage of 90K Physicians May Impact Healthcare Reform

March 06, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 06, 2015 - The healthcare industry could be short up to 90,000 physicians by 2025 if current demand continues to outstrip new graduates, warns the Association of American Medical Colleges in a new report, and the impact on current healthcare reform efforts could be devastating.  As the nation’s aging population strains existing resources and the Affordable Care Act brings in millions of newly insured patients requiring a full spectrum of services, the healthcare industry will need to act quickly if it is to avert a crisis over the coming decade.
“The doctor shortage is real – it’s significant – and it’s particularly serious for the kind of medical care that our aging population is going to need,” said AAMC President and CEO Darrell G. Kirch, MD in a press release.
“The trends from these data are clear — the physician shortage will grow over the next 10 years under every likely scenario.  Because training a doctor takes between five and 10 years, we must act now, in 2015, if we are going to avoid serious physician shortages in 2025.”
Physicians have been facing a number of significant changes to their profession, including the burdens of EHR adoption, shrinking incomes, longer hours to compensate for too many patients, and a general perception that the art of patient care is taking a back seat to regulations, mandates, fussy technologies, and unnecessary healthcare reform.  These issues have sparked early retirements, driven independent physicians into employment, and turned hopeful medical students away from what was once a lucrative and stable career.
While a growing number of lower-level professionals, including nurse practitioners and physician assistants, have stepped in to fill the gaps caused by fleeing physicians, the need for highly trained and qualified physicians will not be going away.
READ MORE: Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
AAMC predicts a gap of between 12,500 and 31,100 primary care physicians and 28,200 and 63,700 non-primary care physicians, including surgeons and specialists.
The shortage may fall closer to the lower end of the predictions if advanced practice nurses and physician assistants are able to replace physicians for basic healthcare needs, but the extent to which these professionals can positively affect the healthcare delivery system depends on several factors.
Healthcare reform efforts, such as the patient-centered medical home (PCMH), accountable care organizations, and value-based reimbursement structures are designed to encourage team-based care and the use of new types of care sites to free up physicians for more complex needs.  The rise of retail clinics and free-standing urgent care centers that enlist nurse practitioners and physician assistants as primary caretakers may help to ease the burdens of full-fledged physicians.  Non-physician providers are helpful for practices that wish to expand their care options, and the use of additional practitioners has been shown to improve patient satisfaction.
Yet physicians are still required to spearhead efforts to improve quality, reduce costs, and treat patients in a timely and efficient manner.  Such a severe shortage of physicians may put the most vulnerable and needy complex patients at risk, including rural populations and the booming number of Medicare-aged beneficiaries.  Graduating medical students are overwhelmingly flocking to urban and suburban regions that offer stable employment from large physician groups or hospital systems, leaving less populous regions without an even distribution of independent practitioners to meet their needs.
READ MORE: What is the New Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Program?
With a quarter of medical residents stating that they would choose an entirely different career path if given the chance to start over, current progress towards the goals of the Affordable Care Act and the federal mission to advance care quality through the beneficial use of interoperable healthcare technology may suffer from a lack of leadership and engagement from overworked, disillusioned physicians who feel isolated and shorthanded.
“The solution requires a multi-pronged approach: continuing to innovate and be more efficient in the way care is delivered as well as increased federal support for graduate medical education to train at least 3,000 more doctors a year to meet the health care needs of our nation’s growing and aging population,” Kirch said.  In July of 2014, the Institute of Medicine recommended a need for $15 billion in public funding to improve the graduate medical education (CME) infrastructure in order to train qualified physicians after they receive their medical degrees.
However, in addition to urging more promising students to follow through with the lengthy and expensive education required to become a physician, the healthcare industry will have to put a concerted effort into funneling patients into alternative care scenarios, ensuring the integration of multi-level professionals into a coordinated care team, and ameliorating some of the unnecessary burdens that physicians are experiencing from frustrating and inadequate technology that was intended to help them practice better.
Healthcare analytics and EHR technologies should be leveraged to improve physician efficiencies instead of sapping productivity, a chief complaint of physicians who are tired of unwieldy interfaces that shave minutes or hours away from patient care.  With something as simple as alarm fatigue threatening to send physicians out the door, technology developers can play a crucial role in reducing the dissatisfaction and negative perceptions of healthcare that are contributing to the projected shortage.
In the meantime, the AAMC and other industry groups will continue to gather data on the impact of healthcare reform on the growing doctor drought, revising their predictions as more information becomes available.  Whether or not the proliferation of accountable care organizations, team-based strategies, allied health professionals, and other new initiatives have a positive impact on the ongoing physician shortage remains to be seen.
Tagged Accountable CarePatient CarePopulation Health Management


