Collaboration, Big Data Help Phoenix Children’s Focus on Value-Based Care

June 19, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 19, 2017 - Mergers, acquisitions, and new partnerships can be a scary prospect for healthcare organizations, no matter which side of the negotiating table they are occupying.
In addition to potential cultural changes, staffing adjustments, and new workflows to adopt, organizations joining forces in the era of value-based care often have to adopt to new electronic health record systems and accept different strategies for measuring their quality, productivity, and outcomes.
While a successful union can rescue revenue cycles, and bring renewed vitality to flagging providers, healthcare organizations must carefully navigate the delicate acquisition process to ensure that new members of the team have the skills and tools required to reach their full potential.
Chad Johnson, Senior VP and Executive Director of the Phoenix Children's Care Network
Source: Xtelligent Media
At Phoenix Children’s, one of the largest pediatric health systems in the country, a desire to offer comprehensive care to the community has led to a firm reliance on big data analytics to gather actionable financial and clinical insights from a rapidly growing provider network.
Over the last three years, Phoenix Children’s has brought more than 100 independent practices into the fold, says Chad Johnson, Senior Vice President and Executive Director of the Phoenix Children's Care Network – and full data transparency is a fundamental requirement for each and every new member of the team.
READ MORE: Value-Based Care Starts with Basic Population Health Management
The ability to use big data analytics to measure productivity, quality, and financial success within a comprehensive network of care will be vital for Phoenix Children’s as it continues an ambitious move into value-based reimbursements.
“During 2017, we’re moving around 100,000 lives into fully risk-based models,” Johnson explained to HealthITAnalytics.com.  “We’re doing this because we believe that the way to truly influence outcomes is to own the medical management of our populations.  Hospitals will need to have a much larger footprint – a larger, integrated network – that includes independent primary care and specialty groups under one umbrella.”
“We want to move aggressively down this path because we feel that unless you’re willing to take that step, you’re never going to be able to really bend that cost curve,” he added. “We’re confident that we can step up to the plate and succeed in a risk-based environment with the strategies we’re cultivating.”
Number one on the list of challenges as the health network shoulders more financial risk is how to accurately and consistently measure quality across so many disparate locations and provider types.
“We’ve had to integrate data from these practices, which are all using a variety of EHRs, and then figure out how to consume that data and present it so that it can be used for optimizing care and to verify quality improvements across the network,” Johnson said.
READ MORE: Why Value-Based Care Must Inspire Partnerships, Data Exchange
“We use this data to target interventions, and to improve the management of our populations, our performance on quality metrics, our utilization, and total cost of care.  That data becomes the number one essential driver of many of the decisions that we’re going to make within our pediatric health enterprise.”
CREATING A PHYSICIAN-DRIVEN TEAM FOR CHANGE
Joining up with a larger health system can be a financially savvy move for smaller physician groups or independent practitioners.  But many organizations undergoing the process have significant concerns about whether they will be able to retain some of their own culture and workflows despite swapping logos.
Many of the worries are centered on quality reporting and the use of data analytics to understand performance. 
As the physician community transitions from meaningful use to MACRA, some practitioners already feel overwhelmed with the idea of adapting to brand new reporting structures and care routines that prioritize population health management, care coordination, and long-term outcomes.
The prospect of layering on additional quality monitoring at the health system level might seem a bridge too far for some frazzled providers. 
READ MORE: Big Data, Value-Based Reimbursement Must Combine for Quality
But Phoenix Children’s is doing everything it can to ensure that new members of its care community have the chance to get involved and stay engaged with the process of defining the quality measurement roadmap.
“There’s always a worry that ‘big brother’ is looking over their shoulders and telling physicians how to practice,” Johnson acknowledged. “But that’s why we have a physician-driven body that is responsible for clinical metrics.”    
Phoenix Children’s has assembled a quality committee composed of physicians who are representative of the entire network.  The committee defines what quality metrics should be used, how to measure them, and how to engage practices to leverage that data for quality improvements.
It is important to Phoenix Children’s that physicians own the process, Johnson stressed, and that the health system doesn’t institute “measurement for measurement’s sake,” which has often been identified as one of the major pain points in the EHR Incentive Programs.
“These are metrics that are developed by pediatricians for pediatricians and supported by pediatricians,” Johnson said.  “We want to make sure that our providers don’t view this as punitive.  We're doing things that represent good medicine.”
Untangling the technical nuances of EHR optimization, information governance, and data analytics to create a data-driven care ecosystem is a top concern for the committee, but not every member of the team needs to be a health IT wizard.  The project is larger than that, Johnson says, and more comprehensive.
“Some of our members are very interested in data, and some are technology newbies,” he said.   
“Not everyone understands all the details of interoperability or data standards, but they are very passionate about outcomes and developing those care pathways to help their patients.  That is equally valuable.”
“When you put those two halves of the equation together, you can come up with some really good ideas.  If you just get the EHR gurus and the data geeks, you can lose something from that other side.  Conversely, if you don’t include the technical experts, you can end up with some untenable ideas about what we can measure and how we can use the information.  All aspects of quality improvement are part of an evolutionary process, and we have to understand the entire picture to build a successful initiative.”
DEVELOPING A CULTURE OF QUALITY ACROSS THE CARE CONTINUUM
Measuring a process or outcome is only half the battle.  The resulting data must also find their way back to the practitioner in a way that allows clinicians to make better decisions, develop efficient care pathways, and improve the patient experience.
Value-based care adds an extra wrinkle to this process: clinicians and executives aren’t the only ones looking at the data.  Payers are also scrutinizing clinical quality and outcomes metrics in order to gauge performance and apportion reimbursements accordingly.
“Risk-based reimbursements require us to demonstrate that we understand what we’re reporting on to our payers and why these metrics matter,” said Johnson.  “So we developed a list of some of the more common pediatric HEDIS measures in order to see what our payers were looking at and allow our physicians to do the same.”
“Now, every physician can see exactly how they’re doing.  They can see the patient population that makes up their numerators and denominators so that they can target their outreach and make a difference with those basics.”
Source: Phoenix Children's
The approach has allowed the network to make strides in the care of common chronic conditions, such as asthma, by using the data to architect targeted strategies and roll out impactful best practices across the network.
“A lot of organizations try to measure everything all at once, but they get so lost in trying to do everything that they end up being unable to do anything that well,” Johnson observed.
The key is to begin simply, with a relatively small and well-defined use case, he suggested.  This will allow organizations to address any issues with new workflows and make adjustments that will ensure that enthusiasm for change doesn’t wither away under negative perceptions of new requirements.
“The interventions have to make sense, and there have to be support structures in place that physicians can understand and work with,” he said.  “Adoption will go up when you have those basic pillars in place.”
ENGAGING ALL PARTNERS IN THE VALUE-BASED ENVIRONMENT  
The collaborative spirit of value-based care must also extend outside of the health network itself, says Johnson.  Developing strong, open, and equitable partnerships with payers is just as important as ensuring that clinicians are using available data to make informed decisions.
“Financial risk changes the traditional conversation between payers and providers,” he explained.  “The straight negotiation of rates in the fee-for-service world doesn’t really involve a lot of ongoing partnership between an insurance company and a delivery system.  But if you want to transition to value, you must find a payer that is willing to take the journey with you and hammer out those new roles for both of you.”
While some hospitals and large health systems have entered the payer arena themselves, creating provider-sponsored insurance plans that give them complete control over the revenue cycle, Phoenix Children’s is not planning to follow that same path. 
Remaining a traditional care provider will allow the network to focus on what it does best: delivering top-notch services to its large population of pediatric patients.
“We are very confident that our payers know how to manage the insurance side of things extremely well,” stated Johnson.  “And we know how to do excellent care delivery.  So let’s be chocolate and peanut butter.  On their own, they’re great.  But together, they’re even better.” 
“We can combine to create something that is truly transformational, but each side needs to understand what their strengths are and how to bring those to the table without stepping on anyone’s toes.”
Once again, that transformative process all comes back to the data.
“Before we invest in these models – before we even start the contracting discussions – we need to have full data disclosure and full claims transparency between us and the insurance company for the population we’re targeting,” Johnson said.  “We all need to see the same things and agree on exactly what they mean.  And that takes trust.”
“If we work together on this, we all win.  If we try to hold anything back or hide something or try to use data as leverage for negotiation, this model won’t work for anyone.  You need to have some very real and open conversations with your partners to decide if you can trust each other enough to go down this path together.  If you’re not sure, then maybe you need to reevaluate.”
The healthcare environment is changing rapidly, he warned, and acute care hospitals are no longer the epicenter of care delivery.  Health systems that cling to the idea that ambulatory networks should take a back seat to the inpatient setting will find themselves lagging behind their competitors in a risk-based ecosystem.
“Hospitals need to swallow their egos,” Johnson asserted.  “They can very easily go wrong by trying to own the entire value-based care project and then force the model onto their partners in the community.  Physicians need to be part of this.  Specialists and other service providers have to be involved.  You have to have a lot of honesty and transparency built in from the beginning.”
Success with pay-for-performance care depends on coming together as a team, he added, with transparent measurement methodologies, clear communication, and health IT systems that inform and support providers instead of hindering them.
“People won’t accept a hospital using strong-arm tactics on them,” said Johnson.  “That isn’t what value-based care should be.  The idea is to create better medicine and better outcomes across the whole community, and the only way to do that is to include the whole community by developing new strategies together.”
“There are a lot of great ideas out there that that might never come from a hospital environment.  You need to go after these different perspectives and really listen to them. You need to use these perspectives to work towards the betterment of the whole healthcare delivery system.  That is how your network and your patients will truly thrive.”
Tagged Care CoordinationCare QualityClinical Quality MeasuresHealthcare Big Data AnalyticsInterviewsMACRAValue Based CareValue Based Reimbursement


