Rapid genetic testing for newborns helps pinpoint diagnoses

November 27, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 27, 2013 - Critically ill infants and their families may find significant benefits from rapid whole genome testing that can identify serious genetic illnesses within 50 hours of spotting a problem, says a new study published in Science Translational Medicine.  In a pilot project, researchers found that combining quick genetic sequencing with analytics software to flag mutations could accurately identify diseases to help physicians care for the newborns with fewer tests and less doubt about patient outcomes.
By using a combination of analytics tools to highlight areas of concern, focus clinician attention on possible mutations, and provide a range of diagnosis information for diseases resulting from the abnormal genes, clinicians could use a bank of symptoms for 595 single-gene diseases to support their clinical decision making with higher accuracy and a shorter time frame.
“Genetic diseases are a particular problem for physicians just because of the staggering number of them that present in children, about 3,500 diseases,” Dr. Stephen Kingsmore, MBChB, DSc, of Children’s Mercy Hospitals and Clinics in Kansas City, Missouri, who helped lead the study, said to PBS.  “Typically, the way that this has been tested is for a doctor to pick the leading candidate gene or part of the DNA code and to look at just that. It’s kind of like fishing with a single fishing line. It can take months. Sometimes, it takes five years to make a diagnosis. And during that period, the family’s waiting and probably the child is getting worse.”
Many of the conditions have similar presentations, and not even the best physician can hold every single permutation of every disease in her head without the help of technology, Kingsmore says.  While relatively few of the diseases identified by the software have treatments or cures, shortening the time from presentation to diagnosis can have a variety of positive impacts.  Parents can receive both genetic counseling to help understand the impact of their DNA on future births or other living children, and can also receive grief counseling to prepare them for the inevitable if their child’s disease is fatal.  “Even for those for whom there isn’t a treatment available, getting a definitive diagnosis, and doing that quickly, makes a huge, huge impact on families who have this shock of a horribly ill baby,” he says.
Dig Deeper
UVA Gene Mutation Research Method Speeds Precision Medicine
Mount Sinai Creates Imaging Data Warehouse for Precision Medicine
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Kingsmore and colleagues are working to bring the system to hospitals on a larger scale as their research continues.  The test currently costs around $13,500 per baby, but may be cost effective when compared to the $8000 per day it typically costs to spend time in the neonatal ICU.
“We’re working now to put this into practice in our hospital here in Missouri, and by the end of the year, we project that we will be able to offer this test, albeit as a research test, where we will have to talk to parents and get their permission to run the test,” he added. “Hopefully, next year, we’re able to broaden that out and offer it to other children in other hospitals.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceHealthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient Care


