Chicago area gets $7M to develop patient outcome database

April 14, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 14, 2014 - Researchers at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine are working with the Institute for Public Health and Medicine to turn a $7 million grant into a collaborative patient-centered outcomes database to reduce health disparities and further population health management in the Chicago metro area.  The funding from the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) will allow Abel Kho, MD, MS and a team of informaticists and other scientists to develop the Chicago Area Patient-Centered Clinical Outcomes Research Network (CAPriCORN), which will capture more than one million patient records for medical research purposes.
“A great strength of the application [for the PCORI grant] was our ability to get both academic and nonacademic institutions onboard,” said Dr. Kho, a member of the Institute for Public Health and Medicine and Northwestern University Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute. “We proved that it was possible to cull information from electronic health records (EHR) to identify cohorts for genetic studies. This project relies on related methods to expand that effort, broadening the scope and scale across an entire city. “Similar projects are underway in other cities, such as New York, but we’re not aware of anybody else who has gotten as much data aggregation across different care settings in as large of a city as Chicago.”
The database will help scientists fill clinical trials more quickly and efficiently with an optimal mix of patients, Kho says. “We would know how many people at each of our sites may be of interest to a scientist. This bi-directional flow of information would mean that if a person fitting a specific request shows up at any of the healthcare providers, the system sends an alert, and if that person has already given appropriate consent, they can be contacted.”
By aggregating such a large amount of EHR data from ethnically and socioeconomically diverse populations, researchers will also be able to paint a detailed portrait of healthcare access deserts, pockets of emerging chronic diseases, and areas where healthcare organizations may need to target preventative or educational services.
Dig Deeper
AMA, Patient Groups Join “All of Us” Precision Medicine Outreach
Six Pediatric Hospitals Create Personalized Medicine Coalition
Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
“CAPriCORN will seek to model how healthcare institutions in complex urban settings can overcome barriers of competition, care fragmentation, and limited resources to develop, test, and implement strategies to improve care for diverse populations and reduce health disparities,” the award notice says. “The diverse healthcare settings and populations within CAPriCORN will also serve as a natural laboratory in which we can examine and learn to address the heterogeneity of treatment effects.”
  Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceHealthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation Health Management


