Hospital quality report cards present conflicts, opportunities

November 05, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 05, 2013 - Since the halcyon days of the kindergarten classroom, children are trained to strive for those shiny gold stars on their report cards, and they learn to trust these assessments as the ultimate measure of their worth.  Reliance on these external measurements doesn’t end with graduation: hospitals and other healthcare providers are constantly graded on their performance, quality, patient safety, and even how clean the bathrooms are, with advanced algorithms, patient and employee surveys, and public financial and clinical disclosures.
Grading hospitals has become big business for magazines, review sites, and consumer protection agencies.  But each independent organization produces its own criteria, and they often conflict, leaving consumers confused and hospitals frustrated trying to respond to a slew of criticisms.  As quality of care becomes increasingly important for the financial health of a hospital system and consumer engagement initiatives lead to choosier and more vocal patients, a squeaky clean image is no longer just a bonus for the marketing department.  How can hospitals leverage the data they have on hand to turn public quality reporting into a benefit instead of a dreaded phone call from the local paper?
The first step may be recognizing that not all score cards are created equal.  The Healthcare Association of New York State (HANYS) published a report this week showing that some of the most popular names in hospital quality reporting, such as US News & World Report, Leapfrog Hospital Safety Scores, and Consumer Reports Hospital Safety Ratings rely on wildly varying and sometimes unverified criteria.
“The variety of scores published by these report cards is confusing, not empowering, for patients seeking care,” said David Evelyn, MD, Vice President for Medical Affairs at Cayuga Hospital. “Patients see the same hospital get a B in one report, and a check in one report, and a semicircle in a third report, and wonder what it means. This report showcases the widespread confusion, and helps us focus on the report cards that are most reliable.”
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
How the Healthcare “Value Chain” Leads to Big Data Analytics Success
The Joint Commission and CMS Hospital Compare received top marks on the “report card of report cards,” since they rely on clinical data drawn from actual charts and use the most current, risk-adjusted information available.  But consumer-facing reviews tended to use patient and clinician opinion surveys, combine data from various time frames to create a composite image, and often don’t allow hospitals the chance to review the data before publication in order to make corrections.
While angrily lashing out at a poor review generates suspicion and derision instead of turning the tide of public opinion, hospitals don’t have to sit back and accept a failing grade.  If the data is available to outside organizations, it’s available to internal performance improvement coordinators and health information managers as well.  An internal review might show deficiencies in workflow or opportunities to use data to gain valuable insight into improvements.
Investing in predictive analytics, real-time data streams, and patient safety tools can help identify and close gaps in care quality, while increasing outreach efforts to the community can polish a hospital’s image while providing more comprehensive services to patients before they end up in the emergency room.
In order to align consumer-focused quality report cards and reduce the unhelpful variation between organizations, HANYS suggests using a uniform set of criteria to eliminate discrepancies that just confuse patients.  The use of appropriate, current, validated, and risk-adjusted data will ensure that all report cards are reporting on the real thing, while introducing a transparent methodology based on national, evidence-based measures can help standardize the approach to grading hospitals on the areas that matter.
“The low-scoring proprietary report cards were developed over a decade ago to fill a gap in public reporting of hospital performance,” added Robert Panzer, MD, Associate Vice President of Patient Care Quality and Safety at University of Rochester Medical Center. “Today, federal and state governments produce high-quality report cards that fill that gap, making those others with weak methods unnecessary and at times harmful as they distract from important work to improve care.”
Tagged Healthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligencePatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


