Feb. 26 HIMSS14 vendor news, announcements, & demonstrations

February 26, 2014

By Nicole Freeman
February 26, 2014 - Truven Health Analytics to present data-based approaches to reduce financial and clinical risk at HIMSS 14th Annual Conference and Exhibition: Truven Health Analytics, a leading provider of healthcare data and analytics solutions and services, announced that Larry Yuhasz, Truven Health director of strategy and business development, will present a session today on data-based approaches for reducing financial and clinical risk at the HIMSS 14th Annual Conference and Exhibition . The session, Payment Reform and the Many Faces of Risk Stratification, will take place on February 25 from 4:00 to 4:30 PM ET, HIMSS Knowledge Center, booth 883, kiosk 13.
HIMSS Analytics 2013 Mobile Technology Survey examines mHealth landscape: Today, at the HIMSS Annual Conference and Exhibition in Orlando, HIMSS Analytics published the results of the 3rd Annual HIMSS Analytics Mobile Survey, examining the use of mobile devices in provider patient care improvement initiatives. For the first time this year, the Survey questions were modified to closely align with the six areas of the mHIMSS Roadmap, a strategic framework for providers to implement mobile and wireless technologies.
Phreesia named Greenway Marketplace ‘Partner of the Year’ at HIMSS14: Two years after debuting the Greenway Marketplace at HIMSS12, Greenway has selected Phreesia as its first Marketplace “Partner of the Year.” Greenway CEO Tee Green presented the award to Phreesia CEO Chaim Indig at the Greenway HIMSS reception Tuesday, Feb. 25 in Orlando, FL. The Greenway Marketplace fosters health IT collaboration and simplifies the adoption of innovation, helping care providers easily evaluate and implement certified, integrated products that add value to their Greenway PrimeSUITE integrated practice management and EHR solution. Phreesia was one of the first members of Greenway Marketplace, which today features nearly 100 certified Greenway-compatible, third-party solutions.
Tagged HIMSSHIMSS14


