Is New Meaningful Use Policy Needed for EHR Interoperability?

March 18, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 18, 2015 - Despite the toll that meaningful use has taken on the provider community, no one can dispute that the EHR Incentive Programs have been successful in producing rapid, game-changing results for the healthcare industry.  With EHRs in nearly every hospital and a large number of physician offices, and many organizations leaping head first into clinical analytics and data-driven population health management, accountable care and patient engagement, the healthcare landscape looks virtually nothing like it did just a decade ago.
But providers still have a long way to go when it comes to leveraging their health IT infrastructure for the greater good, and they are facing some very difficult challenges along the way.  Chief amongst them is a lack of EHR interoperability, which is an issue that meaningful use has not yet been able to successfully address.
As Stage 2 deadlines approach and the Stage 3 criteria are poised for public release, The Brookings Institution raises some important questions in a newly released white paper.  Are our current health IT policies sufficient to make widespread EHR interoperability a reality? How can meaningful use better support providers as they bolster their infrastructure on the way to embracing accountable care?
Meaningful use has faced a variety of criticisms from healthcare stakeholders since its inception in 2009, largely due to the difficulties and expenses of effectively adopting EHR technology.
“Meaningful use has been criticized by providers for its reliance on a single set of specific mandatory functions and workflows (characterized as “one-size-fits-all”) that define data collection and EHR capabilities,” the paper says. “Furthermore, EHR usability and usefulness, which has not been highly rated except by enthusiastic early adopters, has worsened since MU began to drive EHR functionality and design via the parallel MU EHR certification program.  Patient care with MU-certified EHRs requires additional time, and administrative burdens remain substantial for medical practices.”
READ MORE: Should Connectivity, Not Comprehensiveness, be the EHR Goal?
Even those providers who have put in the hours to comply with meaningful use criteria are not experiencing the benefits they were initially promised.  Health information exchange is often difficult or unavailable, foisting the burden onto patients who still need to print out reams of records in order to ensure that their specialists understand their primary care history, or make certain their surgeons are aware of their allergies to medications.
“Even where information is captured in the EHR and exportable using existing interoperability standards, health plans, insurance companies, and employers typically do not accept information in these standard formats and often require duplicative documentation onto unique forms, or other manual processes such as phone calls,” the report states.  Current meaningful use EHR certification criteria do not require software vendors to make EHR interoperability a priority, leaving providers required to snap up products that don’t support their long-term goals.
Healthcare data is simply unable to get where it needs to go when it needs to be there, and a lackluster focus on the adoption of data standards to create meaningful EHR interoperability is to blame.
But there is still time to save meaningful use, Brookings argues, and turn it into a more robust roadmap that puts EHR interoperability in the middle of a framework to lead the industry towards wiser spending, better patient engagement, improved population health management, and truly accountable care.
The key will be to promote the “business case” for EHR interoperability by tying incentives and reimbursements to patient outcomes, which in turn rely on fluid and facile health information exchange.  Leading organizations are already proving the financial benefits of using healthcare analytics and population health management to reduce operational costs, cut preventable hospital readmissions, and embrace payments structured around episodes of care, all of which require high volumes of patient data gathered from as many points along the care continuum as possible.
READ MORE: Exploring the Use of Blockchain for EHRs, Healthcare Big Data
Meaningful use can drive providers towards interoperability the same way it drove organizations towards EHR adoption.  By shifting incentive payments and upcoming financial penalties to reward better quality and improved outcomes, the white paper says, meaningful use will become less about checking off specific workflow processes and more about leveraging health IT in an effective way no matter how an organization prefers to conduct the details of its daily routines.
“The emphasis on outcomes may also reduce administrative burdens on providers, particularly those shifting to value-based payment systems,” write the authors. “These providers are more likely to need IT solutions that integrate information that can reduce costs, and have better aligned incentives with health plans that are seeking to avoid unnecessary health care costs.”
Brookings suggests that federal regulators can retool meaningful use to support the focus on outcomes instead of processes by slashing current requirements that tie EHR functionality to meaningful use measures and encourage EHR vendors to design more intuitive, user-friendly products that center around the real problems of patient care.  Meaningful use penalties and bonuses should also be dependent on reporting patient outcomes and performance, which aligns with a general push towards accountable care arrangements and quality-based reimbursements from the government and private industry.
“This increased emphasis on creating a sustainable business case for better, more efficient care would help drive steps to promote interoperability toward practically useful capabilities,” says the paper. “For example, common format standards create a foundation for effective information exchange of key information for improving patient management, as they make desired and necessary communications easier and less costly. The adoption of such standards would be practically useful for improving care.”
As EHR interoperability becomes more crucial for financial sustainability, customers seeking interoperable solutions will no doubt begin to push vendors towards more universal data standards that deliver the benefits of health information exchange and allow for big data analytics.  This consolidation of data architecture standards will help organizations break down data siloes, communicate with partners, and begin to truly harness healthcare data for actionable decision making that improves quality care.
READ MORE: 21st Century Cures Act Rekindles Information Blocking Debate
Meaningful use can be a part of bringing that transition to pass, instead of being a roadblock, the paper concludes, if EHR interoperability becomes a critical and unavoidable part of the changing financial scene.  “Our policy recommendations should enable more progress in achieving an adaptable health IT infrastructure by helping existing policy transition from one that is too narrow and prescriptive to one that can give MU more practical meaning that resonates with providers and patients by more directly supporting improved outcomes, administrative efficiency, and value.”
Tagged Accountable CareEHR InteroperabilityHealth Information ExchangeInteroperability


