CVS stops selling tobacco as it transitions to care provider

February 05, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 05, 2014 - CVS Caremark is no longer just a corner shop where customers can pick up candy, cosmetics, and aspirin.  Following the successful introduction of its MinuteClinic chain of retail healthcare providers and the company’s focus on its pharmacy and wellness business, CVS today announced that its more than 7600 stores nationwide would stop selling all cigarette and tobacco products by October 1, 2014.
“Ending the sale of cigarettes and tobacco products at CVS/pharmacy is the right thing for us to do for our customers and our company to help people on their path to better health,” said Larry J. Merlo, President and CEO, CVS Caremark. “Put simply, the sale of tobacco products is inconsistent with our purpose.  As the delivery of health care evolves with an emphasis on better health outcomes, reducing chronic disease and controlling costs, CVS Caremark is playing an expanded role in providing care through our pharmacists and nurse practitioners.  The significant action we’re taking today…better positions us for continued growth in the evolving health care marketplace.”
Retail providers, like MinuteClinic at CVS and the Healthcare Clinics at Walgreens, have started to shift patient care away from the traditional physicians office, and may already be having an impact on cost-cutting across the healthcare industry.  Patients in need of a flu shot or a quick check to ensure they don’t have strep throat can stop by the store up the block instead of making an appointment with their primary care provider.
In turn, this means that retail stores with pharmacies are increasing their need to promote an image as a wellness center, not just a convenience store, and are pumping significant investments into growing their healthcare businesses.  Walgreens has recently partnered with analytics provider Inovalon to help grow its patient pool by identifying high-risk patients in need of help managing their medications or understanding the fluctuations of chronic disease.
Dig Deeper
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Top 5 Collaborative Tasks for Population Management, Public Health
Kaiser Permanente Program Reduces Cardiovascular Disease Risks
“By putting analytics into their centers, we get to be part of an integrated care system, together with the insurance companies and Walgreens, and with the member, to stay in good communication with the member’s provider,” says Keith Dunleavy, MD, President and CEO of Inovalon. “We would reach out to [a member with asthma control problems] and invite them to be seen at a Walgreens.  We’d be able to focus that visit on these issues surrounding their asthma, making sure they understand their medications and bring their asthma management to a better state.”
Research has long since confirmed that tobacco use is a major culprit in expensive and serious chronic diseases like COPD and heart disease, as well as deadly cancers of the lung.  While clinical analytics can help identify patients who are at risk of landing in the hospital due to long-term smoking, stopping patients from accessing tobacco in the first place may be an even more effective way of preventing tobacco-related diseases from manifesting.
“CVS Caremark is continually looking for ways to promote health and reduce the burden of disease,” said CVS Caremark Chief Medical Officer Troyen A. Brennan, MD, MPH. “Stopping the sale of cigarettes and tobacco will make a significant difference in reducing the chronic illnesses associated with tobacco use.”
“As a leader of the health care community focused on improving health outcomes, we are pledging to help millions of Americans quit smoking,” added Merlo. “In addition to removing cigarettes and tobacco products for sale, we will undertake a robust national smoking cessation program.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPatient CarePopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


