Expectations Clash over Informal, Online Patient Engagement

June 25, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 25, 2015 - Tech-savvy, smartphone-toting patients may be strapping on wearables and tapping on mHealth apps all day long, but many providers still aren’t sure if they want the added burden, annoyance, or responsibility of communicating with their patients through Facebook messages or email, finds a new study published this month in the Journal of General Internal Medicine. 
Despite the hype over increasing online patient engagement and patient-provider communication, many healthcare organizations “actively discourage social media contact with individual patients,” says Johns Hopkins School of Public Health post-doctoral fellow Joy Lee, PhD, MS.  These policies may be out of touch with current consumer expectations, which could be leaving valuable patient management opportunities on the table.
Lee and her fellow researchers conducted a poll of more than 2200 retail pharmacy patients to gauge their attitudes about patient engagement and online communication with their physicians.  Demand for online contact is high, with 57 percent of respondents saying that they want to use their providers’ websites to access health information, and 46 percent stating they would like to be able to use email to track their health status and participate in education.
Yet only seven percent of participants said that they had actually used provider websites, including established patient portals, to access their personal health data.  Another seven percent said that they had filled prescriptions through email.  The study suggests that patients may not be aware of their options for conducting online patient engagement activities, but that doesn’t stop them for exploring other internet-based ways of chatting with their providers.
Just over a third of patients used email to contact their physicians in the six months prior to the poll, the study found, while an additional 18 percent used Facebook posts or messages to do the same.  These patients skewed younger, were more likely to be college graduates, and were more likely to have higher incomes. 
READ MORE: Gaps in Chronic Disease Care Leave Patients, Docs Frustrated
“The medical establishment needs to figure out how best to incorporate this reality into their practice while properly ensuring security safeguards,” said Lee. “This is an area where there is significant patient interest, but institutions and health care providers haven’t caught up.”
Online patient engagement has been a contentious topic for providers since patient portal use was first floated as a requirement in Stage 2 meaningful use.  Some providers worried that the five percent online engagement threshold seemed unattainable for those operating in areas with patients who might not have access to the tools and education to view their personal health information online. 
Others simply did not want to have to comb through patient emails and portal communications on top of their regular workload.  The notion of scrolling past dozens of Facebook messages from patients may not seem that attractive to overwhelmed physicians – especially when social media communications don’t help them meet Stage 2 requirements.
Some major professional societies agree that physicians and social media simply should not mix.  In 2013, the American College of Physicians and the Federation of State Medical Boards directed physicians to keep their fingers off their keyboards when not documenting in their EHRs.
“Physicians should keep their professional and personal personas separate. Physicians should not ‘friend’ or contact patients through personal social media,” the policy statement said. “Physicians should not use text messaging for medical interactions even with an established patient except with extreme caution and consent by the patient.”
READ MORE: Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
“Situations in which a physician is approached through electronic means for clinical advice in the absence of a patient-physician relationship should be handled with judgment and usually should be addressed with encouragement that the individual schedule an office visit or, in the case of an urgent matter, go to the nearest emergency department.”
While keeping business and pleasure to unrelated accounts is sound advice for any professional, official patient portals have seen such lackluster uptake that CMS is considering cutting the 5 percent patient engagement threshold down to just one single patient per reporting period.  Could Facebook and Gmail plug the gaps in care coordination, chronic disease management, and population health management that unused patient portals are leaving wide open?
After all, patients use the internet for medical research at staggering rates, and seek advice from patient support groups – or from complete strangers with no clinical training – about symptoms or diagnoses.  Some studies indicate that patients trust online resources and mHealth apps significantly more readily than they trust their physicians. 
And providers aren’t immune from the lure of Twitter: even in 2012, nearly a quarter of physicians regularly used social media sites to conduct research, share their knowledge, and communicate with peers.  Close to half physicians use smartphones, tablets, or some other internet-enabled technology on a daily basis to conduct work-related tasks.  Should patient communication through the means that patients desire not be one of them?
Only if the value in expanding patient engagement outweighs the nuisance of sifting through unsolicited, unregulated notifications or the constant bleeping of instant messenger services.  If providers can find a way to manage these activities without disrupting their workflows – or better yet, find a way to be financially rewarded for taking on the challenge – then social media may have a chance of becoming a meaningful method of engagement.
READ MORE: 21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Until then, providers should encourage patients to make use of web-based portals and official communication channels if they want to chat online.  Discussing these options with patients as part of the registration process or during an office consult may help to expand awareness and funnel online messages through fewer, more manageable outlets as the healthcare industry attempts to meet patient expectations in a rapidly changing technical landscape. 
Tagged mHealthPatient EngagementPatient SatisfactionPopulation Health Management


