Analytics map uninsured patients, manage population health

September 10, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 10, 2013 - Actionable population health management relies on having an accurate picture of the patients you’re working with.  But oftentimes, the neediest patients are the ones who live on the fringes, or off the grid altogether.  How can healthcare organizations identify, map, and reach out to the homeless, the low-income, and the uninsured?  By analyzing the data they do have in order to provide preventative services and chronic disease management tools that can cut costs and improve quality of life. In Maryland, healthcare officials are using analytics to supplement census information about underserved populations ahead of key provision of the Affordable Care Act and other reform initiatives.  By collecting data on neighborhoods that see high emergency room use, a key indicator of low insurance rates, officials can produce a richer picture of healthcare needs on the community level, reports the Baltimore Sun. “Understanding where health care problems are and how they can be prevented is a critical need,” state Health Secretary Joshua M. Sharfstein said.  New maps of community needs produced by these analytics “will help the state both reduce suffering and disease and control costs.”  With US census data estimating that 21% of Maryland’s uninsured citizens live in Prince George County, and 14% live in Baltimore, efforts to target services to these populations is critical to apportion resources to community health centers and hospitals. Health information exchange is also providing important data on emergency room “hotspots”, according to David Horrocks, executive director of the Chesapeake Regional Information System for our Patients (CRISP).  The HIE collects real-time data on hospital admissions that can be reported to primary care physicians through an alert system, and can also generate detailed maps of emergency room overuse. Based on these rich sources of data, public health officials can target local community events, distribute literature to schoolchildren to bring home to their parents, and work with religious organizations to bring education to patients who may not otherwise have access to information on public assistance programs, including expanding Medicaid coverage, disease symptoms and management, and the importance of regular physician contact.  “Some people who are vulnerable are not linked to anything, and those are the trickiest people to find,” said Kathleen Westcoat, executive director of Health Care Access Maryland. “Nothing beats that personal interaction. Being where people go is really critical.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig Data AnalyticsHIE AnalyticsPatient DataPopulation Health Management


