FDA stops 23andMe, but can it stop personal genetic medicine?

November 26, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 26, 2013 - Google-backed personal genetic test company 23andMe made a splash this week in all the wrong ways after receiving a stern warning letter from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) demanding that the company stop marketing its $99 home genetics test due to a lack of regulatory clearance and proven effectiveness.   23andMe in turn asserts that people have a right to their genetic information with or without federal approval. For providers, the tussle brings up an interesting question about the future course of personalized medicine, patient-provided data, and disease research.  How should such external information be used in analyzing a patient’s health risks to prevent future diseases that may end up being costly and complicated?
While half a million people have already used the saliva swab to illuminate their ancestry and their risk of certain diseases with a genetic component, such as Alzheimer’s and breast cancer, the FDA is concerned that the test makes more claims than it can back up.  Particularly worrying to the agency is a component of the test that highlights BRCA-related breast and ovarian cancer risks.  After high-profile celebrity cases like Angelia Jolie’s preventative double mastectomy based on her genetic risk of contracting cancer, the FDA notes that “a false positive…could lead a patient to undergo prophylactic surgery, chemoprevention, intensive screening, or other morbidity-inducing actions, while a false negative could result in a failure to recognize an actual risk that may exist.”
Proponents of widespread genetic sequencing like Misha Angrist, assistant professor at the Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy at Duke University, believe that few patients would sign themselves up for breast or ovary removal based only on the results of the mail-order kit.  But the concerns for providers and patients go deeper.  When a seemingly healthy patient takes a 23andMe test and goes to her provider with her results, will her insurance company pay for a proper genetic test when no other indications are present?  What about preventative blood thinners if they are at risk for clots or strokes?
23andMe founder Ann Wojcicki thinks they won’t.   “Physicians have told us that the biggest problem with 23andMe is that we generate non-billable questions,” she said at the Innovation Uncensored event in San Francisco recently. “If a patient goes to their doctor and says ‘I’m at high risk for a blood clot, what do I do?’ the doctor will say, ‘Come back to me when you have a blood clot.’”
On one hand, it is the FDA’s primary responsibility to provide consumers with information about potentially risky products, and 23andMe is not disputing that they have not completed the regulatory clearance process.  They simply think it’s unnecessary.  Are they right?  Does the value of arming patients with their genetic profile cheaply and quickly outweigh the risk of false positives?  Aren’t preventative medicine, population health management, and big data in healthcare all geared towards heading expensive, chronic, and potentially fatal conditions off at the pass?
READ MORE: NIH Opens Up “All of Us” to Research Participants Nationwide
Genomics holds a great deal of promise for healthcare as a whole to stratify risk, predict outcomes, and target therapies to patients based on the most intimate details of their biological makeup.  While it is still a new component of practice for many physicians, and not all providers are comfortable with the idea, genetic testing is only going to become more widespread as the technology advances.
The FDA isn’t saying that 23andMe is a bad product.  It’s just saying that Wojcicki needs to go through the same rigorous review as every other commercial offering on the market that makes medical claims.  “We recognize that we have not met the FDA’s expectations regarding timeline and communication regarding our submission,” said a statement from the company. “Our relationship with the FDA is extremely important to us, and we are committed to fully engaging with them to address their concerns.”
Empowering patients to take charge of their own genetics can be a great thing if it leads to healthier lifestyle changes and more supervision from physicians in areas of high risk, but part of the daily dance of healthcare is balancing potential outcomes and the present facts at hand. Hopefully the 23andMe and the FDA will come to an amicable agreement about the next steps to maximize the benefit of a product that certainly has important implications for providers.
  Tagged Big Data AnalyticsEHR Patient DataGenomicsHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Data AnalyticsHealthcare Data ManagementMedical ResearchPatient Care


