Groups Urge $34.1B NIH Budget for Precision Medicine, Research

September 07, 2016

By Nathan Boroyan
September 07, 2016 - Continued progress with precision medicine, population health, and other critical research activities depends on securing the proposed $34.1 billion budget for the National Institutes of Health, according to more than 200 patient advocacy groups, healthcare societies, researchers, and academic institutions.
In a letter delivered to Congressional leaders and the House and Senate Appropriations Committees, the Ad Hoc Group for Medical Research argues that adequate funding for NIGH activities is necessary to avoid serious consequences.
"Our organizations strongly support an approach to the final FY 2017 spending package that maximizes the federal support for NIH and avoids a long-term continuing resolution (CR)," the letter says. "Aside from the budget implications, a long-term CR would create inefficiencies and add uncertainty to a system that is already under stress. We strongly urge lawmakers to make finalizing the FY 2017 appropriations a priority."
Congress increased NIH funding in FY 2016. However, small cuts over the past decade have reduced the agency's purchasing power by 22 percent, "which could lead to delays in promising research or discourage young scientists from entering the field," the letter says.
Dig Deeper
Pancreatic Cancer is Target of New Precision Medicine Grants
FDA Eager for Precision Medicine Under 21st Century Cures Act
Northwell Health Launches Precision Medicine, Cancer Biobank
"Continuing the momentum of your FY 2016 investment in NIH is key to ensuring that the nation can continue to accelerate the development of life-changing cures, pioneering treatments, and innovative preventive strategies," the document continued.
In their letter, the group called bipartisan commitment to increasing funding for the NIH "essential in enabling researchers at universities and research institutions in all 50 states to pursue emerging scientific opportunities to address the nation's most pressing health needs."  
The Senate Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education Appropriations Subcommittee approved the $34.1 billion budget in June. The bill represented a $2 billion increase over 2016 levels, which would help to fund precision medicine research, chronic disease management and prevention programs, and antibiotic resistance activities. While the pending budget bill would be a welcome addition to the nation's scientific community, Congress has yet to greenlight the funding.
Dig Deeper:
NIH Seeks $1.1B to Fund Precision Medicine, Cancer Moonshot
UCSF Receives $85M NIH Grant for Precision Medicine Research
Tagged Medical ResearchPersonalized MedicinePrecision Medicine


