Midwest Takes the Lead in Accountable Care Collaboration

January 13, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 13, 2015 - The adoption of accountable care principles may not be top priority for many healthcare organizations, but for a number of providers in the Midwestern states, the process of forming new collaborations to improve quality, boost care coordination, cut costs, and increase the flow of data across multiple care sites is in full swing. Six Ohio health systems, including Cleveland Clinic, have announced a new accountable care collaboration that will explore ways to achieve the goals of healthcare reform that will touch millions of patients.
The Midwest Health Collaborative will include six major heath systems with a combined 100,000 employees and 40 hospitals across the state. The partners include Aultman, Cleveland Clinic, OhioHealth, Premier Health, ProMedica, and TriHealth. While the collaboration does not include plans for any type of merger or administrative integration, the six independent systems will work together to share ideas, develop best practices, reduce costs, and focus on population health management on a large scale.
The organizations will seek to leverage the principles of value-based care as they adopt more advanced clinical analytics to foster population health management, devise new strategies for care coordination and spread adoption of the patient-centered medical home model, and develop standardized care pathways to reduce variation in price and quality. The partnership will also work to assess the possibility of creating a statewide provider network that will provide comprehensive clinical management to patients across the region.
Ohio is not the only state seeking to take control of spending and care quality by putting competition aside and banding together to manage population health on a high level. In August, six Wisconsin health systems announced a very similar project, covering up to 90% of patients in the state, founded on a single technology vendor, Epic Systems, and a shared health plan to encourage patient access and health information exchange.
Dig Deeper
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
“Our vision is to use our collective resources wisely by being good stewards of the clinical, administrative, IT, research, patient experience, care management and other shared expertise within our six systems,” said Greg Devine, president and CEO of the abouthealth partnership. “We want to provide better value in health care.”
Other Wisconsin hospitals have refused to be left out of the accountable care landscape, forming the Integrated Health Network to challenge abouthealth as the collaborations push for greater efficiencies and reduced costs.
In rural areas of the Midwest, including Illinois, Indiana, and Iowa, accountable care collaborations are making inroads at small critical access hospitals and clinics as providers search for better ways to maintain financial viability and serve needy patients to the best of their abilities. These smaller organizations have banded together with far-flung partners to meet the minimum beneficiary requirements to participate in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (MSSP), illustrating just how much they view accountable care as an important avenue for future sustainability and the delivery of quality care.
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsPopulation Health Management


