Kansas pours $9.5 million into community mental health

May 29, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 29, 2014 - Kansas is taking control of its population’s mental health issues with a $9.5 million investment in behavioral health services and a focus on community care centers.  As providers attempt to integrate mental healthcare more fully into the care continuum, ensuring access for patients who might otherwise end up in the emergency room, in jail, or on the streets, the state’s focus on mental health may help to reduce costs system-wide.
“This is a major, important issue,” said Governor Sam Brownback during an announcement of the new programs. “These initiatives will help improve mental health services across the state of Kansas.”  The state’s federally-funded Temporary Assistance for Needy Families block grant will gift about $7 million to social service programs intended to support families in the home, he added.
Untreated mental health problems have a particularly severe impact on families with children, added Kansas Department for Children and Family Services Secretary Phyllis Gilmore.  “The children bear the brunt of their parents’ problems,” she said. “In the current fiscal year – since July 2013 – more than 3,000 children have been removed from home for a wide variety of reasons, including behavioral problems, neglect and physical abuse. Mental health issues are often at the root of the problems in the home.”
Additionally, $2 million will come from the dismantling of managed care company Kansas Health Solutions and $500,000 will be found in a Governor’s Budget Amendment tied to savings from the replacement KanCare Medicaid program.
Dig Deeper
SC Online Population Health Dashboard Reveals Community Disparities
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
The state will focus on improving community-based care clinics to eliminate long waiting times, help community providers cope with the flood of newly insured patients under the ACA, and develop vocational training programs for the mentally ill to help ensure a productive lifestyle and reduce dependence on government benefits.
However, the National Alliance on Mental Illness states that the funding will be inadequate to truly tackle the problem without a significant expansion in the state’s Medicaid program.  “I think it’s pretty clear the [Brownback] administration is not interested in that right now,” said NAMI Kansas Executive Director Rick Cagan. “But NAMI is still committed to an expanded Medicaid program because there’s a whole segment of the population that simply will not have access to quality mental health services without some type of insurance coverage.”
An expansion of Medicaid would help the 21,000 mentally ill and uninsured residents of the state pay for care, he said.  “You would have to perhaps double the size of the mental health centers’ budgets just as a starting point for being able to get all those people into treatment,” Cagan says. “Expanding Medicaid is the way to close that gap.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


