Care Coordination Plan Cuts DASH Hospital Readmissions by 9%

July 01, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 01, 2015 - The implementation of a care coordination strategy for patients at risk of negative outcomes related to certain mental or behavioral health conditions helped to reduce the preventable 30-day hospital readmission rate at Brigham and Women’s Hospital by nine percent over three years, according to a new paper published in the Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety. 
When the hospital made an organizational-wide effort to identify and manage patients with delirium, alcohol withdrawal, and suicide harm (DASH), providers were able to reduce the readmissions disparity for this group of patients without significantly disrupting the clinical workflow.
"Patients with a DASH diagnosis can be found anywhere in the hospital, so it was important to include our entire patient population in our efforts," said Barbara E. Lakatos, DNP, PCNS-BC, APN, program director of the Psychiatric Nursing Resource Service at BWH and the lead author of the paper.  DASH patients are approximately two percent more likely to experience a preventable 30-day hospital readmission when compared to BWH’s overall readmission rate.
"If not appropriately identified and treated, delirium can lead to negative outcomes and poor quality of life for those affected,” she added. “We are committed to preventing this by assessing patients in an effort to correctly diagnose and treat those who present with potential DASH conditions so we can improve their care and outcomes.”
Dig Deeper
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Care Coordination, Medication Adherence Key to Diabetes Care
Using ICD-9 codes to identify patients who fell under the DASH criteria, care teams improved their screening rates between 2010 and 2013.  The interdisciplinary effort, which required nurses and physicians to work closely with each other to coordinate care and manage high-risk patients, saw widespread adoption and positive impacts over the length of the study period.
"Whenever a patient was identified as high risk for DASH, we convened an interdisciplinary care team for a discussion about the best approach for that patient," said co-author Adam C. Schaffer, MD, a hospitalist at Brigham and Women's/Faulkner Hospitals. "Although we established guidelines, the approach for each patient was personalized and directed by the collaborative care team with consideration of the patients' individual health history and symptoms."
After reviewing available resources to manage the DASH population, Lakatos and her research team developed guidelines and training resources, including videos, manuals, workshops, and assessment tools, to bring the enhanced care coordination and population health management technique to the workflow in slow but steady stages.
"The success of this program shows the importance of a collaborative approach between nurses and physicians and driven by hospital leadership, in order to implement standardized assessment tools and clinical guidelines to effectively improve outcomes for our patients," said Lakatos.
Over the three-year study period, the number of identified DASH patients increased by approximately one percent, and their average length of stay remained significantly higher than the general population.  DASH patients typically spend around four more days in the hospital than other populations, the study found.  However, with increased care coordination and management, the preventable hospital readmission rate for the DASH group decreased by nine percent, from 15.1 percent to 13.7 percent.  Overall, BWH has a readmission rate of 13.3 percent.
"A key reason for these positive results is that our DASH program was embedded in the clinical culture at the Brigham,” added author David Gitlin, MD, chief of the division of Medical Psychiatry at Brigham and Women's/Faulkner Hospitals. “Successful implementation and sustainability in other organizations will similarly require aligning with processes and resources already in place.”
Tagged Care CoordinationHospital ReadmissionsPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


