Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Applications Close Sept. 15

September 14, 2016

By Nathan Boroyan
September 14, 2016 - The online application for practices interested in participating in the new value-based care model, Comprehensive Primary Care Plus (CPC+), will close at 11:59pm ET on Thursday night, Sept. 15, the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) announced.
The CPC+ initiative is the largest attempt to date geared towards improve primary care in the US. The model will run from January 1, 2017 through 2021.
"We believe CPC+ is the future of primary care in America," CMS said in a press release. "We are pleased to partner with aligned public and private payers across the country to support up to 5,000 practices delivering the care that best meets the needs of their patients and improves health outcomes."
CPC+ is open to practices in 14 regions across the country, including: Arkansas, Colorado, Hawaii, Montana, Michigan, New Jersey, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Kansas, Missouri, New York, Rhode Island, and Tennessee.
Dig Deeper
What is the New Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Program?
Claims Data Analytics Show Diabetes Has Third Largest Health Impact
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
Additional practices in select counties in Greater Kansas City, North Hudson-Capital, Ohio and Northern Kentucky, and Greater Philadelphia will also be eligible.
The initiative will encompass 5,000 practices, including 20,000 providers and 25 million patients.
CMS announced the CPC+ model in April. The new initiative builds on the Comprehensive Primary Care model, which was launched in 2012 and will finish at the end of this year.
CPC+ aims to help practices transition from fee-for-service to value-based care by offering financial incentives. Eligible practices are allowed to apply to two different financial and care quality tracks, both of which focus on transforming practices in key areas, including: access and continuity, care management, comprehensiveness and coordination, patient and caregiver engagement, and planned care and population health.
Track One practices will receive monthly care management fees and fee-for-service payments under the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule. Track Two practices will receive monthly care management fees and reduced fee-for-service payments.
Practices in both tracks will receive upfront incentive payments. Providers will either keep or return reimbursements to CMS based on how practices perform on quality measurements.
To apply for the Comprehensive Primary Care Plus program, please visit the online portal available here.
Tagged Accountable CarePatient Centered CarePopulation Health ManagementValue Based Care Reimbursement


