OIG to Review Hospital Quality, Population Health in 2015

November 04, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
OIG oversight will ensure that public health agencies are utilizing resources appropriately while providing high quality services.
November 04, 2014 - The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) will continue to make reviews of public health organizations and population health agencies part of its 2015 agenda, according to the newly released work plan for the coming fiscal year.  OIG is responsible for ensuring the financial integrity of HHS organizations and is instrumental in identifying areas of fraud, abuse, negligence, or improper management.  Organizations such as the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), and Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), which have all been impactful in the health IT research and implementation sphere, will fall under the OIG’s ongoing oversight of the public health ecosystem.
“Effective management of public health programs is essential to ensure that they achieve their goals and best serve the programs’ intended beneficiaries,” the 2015 report states. “In its work planning activities in fiscal year 2015 and beyond, OIG will consider key risk areas, such as the adequacy of CDC and its public health partners’ preparedness to respond to public health emergencies, including disease outbreaks. Future work planning efforts will also include examinations of access to quality services and health and safety protections, including the integrity of the food, drug, and medical supply chain.”
Specific OIG projects and reviews include the following:
Examining the implementation of AHRQ patient safety organizations (PSOs)
Dig Deeper
Time Needed to Improve Quality in Value-Based Care Programs
SC Online Population Health Dashboard Reveals Community Disparities
Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
OIG will scrutinize hospital participation in patient safety organizations and determine which PSOs provide data to AHRQ’s patient safety databases.  “A prior OIG review found that hospitals did not identify all serious adverse events, suggesting that hospital incident-reporting systems may be an unreliable source of information for PSOs,” the work plan says.  “We will evaluate PSOs’ efforts to identify and resolve patient safety problems in hospitals and identify any barriers to the full and effective implementation of the PSO program.”
Assessing the effectiveness of CDC prevention and public health grants
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is a major source of grant money for researchers in the public health space.  OIG will ensure that CDC is effectively managing funding for its Prevention and Public Health Fund program and will also make certain that grantees are using their funding appropriately.
Ensuring HRSA community health centers are complaint with provisions of the Affordable Care Act
OIG will determine if community health centers receiving funding under ACA provisions are complying with laws and regulations that govern their participation.  OIG will ensure that expenditures are allowable and accurately accounted for.  This project is a new effort for the 2015 fiscal year.
Overseeing hospital quality within the Indian Health Service (IHS)
The 28 acute care hospitals that provide inpatient coverage to American Indians and Alaska Natives will receive ongoing oversight from OIG to ensure that they are providing high quality care.  “We will examine IHS’s efforts to monitor each hospital’s ability to provide quality care and maintain compliance with Medicare conditions of participation and will identify which quality or compliance problems are most common,” OIG says.
Confirming HIPAA contingency compliance for hospitals adopting EHR systems
The Inspector General will conduct research on how hospitals adopting EHR systems are complying with HIPAA contingency planning provisions.  “The HIPAA Security Rule requires covered entities to have a contingency plan that establishes policies and procedures for responding to an emergency or other occurrence that damages systems that contain protected health information,” the work plan explains.  “We will also compare hospitals’ contingency plans with government- and industry-recommended practices.”
Tagged Population Health ManagementQuality Of Care


