CVS to Charge More for Prescriptions Filled at Tobacco Sellers

October 22, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 22, 2014 - CVS Health will charge an additional $15 for prescriptions filled at pharmacies that sell tobacco products.
CVS Health will be employing a novel population health management technique by charging an additional copay to patients who fill their prescriptions at pharmacies that still sell tobacco products.  After stopping the sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products earlier this year and changing its branding to reflect a greater commitment to the healthcare provider sphere, the unique take on an out-of-network penalty could influence patients to make more conscientious choices – or simply drive them to cheaper alternatives.
The $15 tobacco surcharge is simply an option that pharmacy benefits managers (PBMs) can choose when selecting their coverage, the company said.  The surcharge will vary according to client, added Carolyn Castel, a CVS spokeswoman, and the company does not expect universal adoption of the feature.  However, Morgan Stanley analyst Ricky R. Goldwasser said that the financial rewards could be great, even when only employed on a limited basis.  CVS could recoup about 6% of the revenues it will lose to the cessation of tobacco sales, Goldwasser said, calling the plan a “$3.6 billion revenue opportunity.”
It may also increase pressure on the pharmacy chain’s major competitors, such as Walgreens, to follow its lead and stop the sale of cigarettes, but the impact on smaller pharmacies is yet to be seen.
Dig Deeper
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
How NPs, PAs Add Value to Population Health Management Teams
Patient-Centered Medical Home Has Saved Payer $1.2B Since 2011
“It’s an unfair competitive practice,” said John Giampolo, head of the Independent Pharmacy Alliance, to the Wall Street Journal. Giampolo is concerned that CVS will not publically identify all the pharmacies that are safe from the added fee, leading customers to choose CVS in order to avoid the hassle of finding out on their own. “Consider a local pharmacy that hasn’t carried tobacco for years, but the consumer may not know whether the pharmacy participates or not. So a consumer may go to a CVS pharmacy to save the $15. An independent pharmacy may have to scramble to do their own marketing.”
CVS countered by saying that they do plan to provide a full list of participating pharmacies to customers who would be affected by the charge in advance of any coverage changes.  The company added that the scheme was developed in response to a number of their clients who had asked about the development of a tobacco-free network.  CVS has recently seen a rise in its pharmacy benefits management segment, with revenues increasing by 16.2% in the first half of 2014 to $21.8 billion.  The surcharge plan does seem likely to add to that growth, other experts said.
“CVS retail drugstore business will certainly benefit, because prescription volume will shift into CVS retail pharmacies from other drugstore chains,” said Adam Fein of Pembroke Consulting, who tracks pharmacy distribution matters. “Today, Caremark’s PBM pays for almost one-third of the prescriptions filled at CVS’s retail pharmacies. This program will further increase the volume staying within CVS Health’s integrated payer and dispensing system.”
Tagged Care CoordinationPopulation Health Management


