Big Data Analytics, Precision Medicine Join for Cancer Insights

December 09, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 09, 2015 - Precision medicine is all about developing innovative, individualized treatments in response to a patient’s particular genetic makeup, and nowhere has this approach been more successful so far than in the realm of oncology. 
The ability to identify the origins and potential growth patterns of specific tumors by leveraging advanced genetic sequencing techniques is already advancing cancer care at a lightning pace, and breakthroughs are likely to continue as big data analytics technologies evolve to provide a sophisticated and powerful foundation for precision care.
At the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), pushing the boundaries of cancer care is nothing new.  Over the past few years, the group has been working hard to develop CancerLinQ, a learning big data analytics platform that aims to incorporate the experiences and outcomes of large patient cohorts into a clinical decision support knowledge bank accessible to oncologists around the world.
The ambitious project has progressed quickly towards broader deployment, with the help of analytics technologies from SAP and hardware from Intel.  Built upon the idea that effective cancer treatment must incorporate the entire genetic and medical history of a patient in order to be successful, ASCO’s approach to oncology has the potential to change the way providers view the role of big data in patient care.
“The aspirational goal of CancerLinQ is that we will be collecting data automatically on the backend of EMR systems into an anonymized and aggregated database of patients that we will follow longitudinally,” explained Kevin Fitzpatrick, CEO of CancerLinQ, LLC.
READ MORE: Will Clinical Decision Support, Health IT Cut Diagnostic Errors?
“We’ll do that without imposing an additional clerical burden on already-embattled providers, and then allow researchers and others to interrogate that data to look for relationships and to look for therapeutic approaches that have been used in different types of patients with different manifestations of disease.”
Bringing actionable precision medicine into clinical practice
Currently, only a tiny percentage of cancer patients are included in clinical trials and other data collection efforts that give researchers and clinicians insights into the effectiveness of novel treatments.  But clinical trials strictly control their participants for a reason, and that leaves a significant gap between real-life patient experiences and the data that researchers can work with. 
CancerLinQ hopes to close that gap, not just by collecting a wider array of patient data for analysis, but also by allowing clinicians to assess their own performance and patient pool using industry benchmarks.
“One of the really interesting things about CancerLinQ is the fact that a physician will be able to look at her patients in an identified fashion, so she can interrogate her own patients and fire quality measures against them and look for her conformity against accepted guideline measures,” Fitzpatrick said. “It would also allow her to have full access to the anonymized database of all of her colleagues’ experiences across North America and, ultimately, around the world.”
READ MORE: AI, Big Data, IoT Bring Growth to Multiple Healthcare Markets
This capability will be important to clinicians who are now viewing cancer in a very different light than they may have done a few years ago. 
“Cancers used to be treated based on the organ in which they occurred,” said SAP Chief Medical Officer David Delaney, MD. “Lung cancer was lung cancer. There was one type and you treated with a handful of agents that were good against lung cancer. Same thing with the pancreas or kidneys or anything else. And some patients did really well and got cured, some people did okay and lived a little longer, some people did very badly and died quickly.”
“Flash forward a few years, and now we look at cancer on a molecular level, based on the type of mutation and the signatures of the tumors,” he continued.  Delaney also leads SAP’s US healthcare division. “So, it turns out, lung cancer isn't lung cancer, but it's a whole bunch of various, individual, discrete illnesses based on where the mutation occurred and what molecular markers there are.”
“So we’re moving away from treating cancer based on the organ where the malignancy.  Now, you might have a lung cancer that's treated similarly to a pancreatic cancer because the origin of the mutation is more similar to pancreatic cancers, despite being in a different organ.”
With CancerLinQ, clinicians who encounter a unique presentation of a certain type of cancer can consult the database and search for similar cases worldwide, Fitzpatrick added.  “It really democratizes access to information across the entire oncology community, independent of geography and independent of the type of care setting in which one practices.”
READ MORE: Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare: Augmentation or Companionship?
“If we get this right as a diagnostic tool, CancerLinQ may become as important for the oncologist as the microscope is for the infectious disease specialists,” he said.  “It’s a lens that will allow them to look at the disease they’re treating in detail.” 
Addressing the four spheres of big data analytics
Getting to that point will be no easy feat.  The underlying big data analytics infrastructure required to collect, standardize, and deliver insights is complex and still maturing.  True precision medicine requires providers to have access to data from all segments of a patient’s life: clinical data, genetic information, socioeconomic circumstances, lifestyle choices, and more. 
While emerging big data management strategies are making it easier for providers to aggregate pieces of data from electronic health records, medical devices, and Internet of Things technologies, a comprehensive “state of the patient” portrait can only be revealed when all these disparate data sources come together, asserts Bob Rogers, Chief Data Scientist at Intel Corporation.
“There are four circles of data that need to be addressed,” he said to HealthITAnalytics.com.  “There’s clinical and claims data, lab and medical device data, patient-generated health data (PGHD), and then of course all of the ‘omics’ information: genomics, metabolomics, et cetera – everything that is really in its infancy in terms of implementation at the site of care.
Each one of these data spheres presents enormous challenges, and not just for oncologists.  Solving the problems of unrestricted access to the full spectrum of clinical data alone is enough to fully occupy the healthcare industry for years to come.
For example, unstructured documents “contain a huge amount of very actable clinical information,” Rogers said. A summary of care letter from a cardiologist to a primary care provider can include test results, diagnosis information, and suggested treatment plans that never get coded into structured data. 
“That document gets scanned into the primary care provider’s EHR, and it's sitting there full of living, beautiful, actionable information.  But it's an image.  So now you need a technology to extract that image into text, and a natural language processing tool to make sense of it.”
The second circle of lab, medical device data, and advanced imaging studies presents similar obstacles.  “This is a higher level of imaging beyond just the imaging of text documents,” Rogers said. While text documents accompanying imaging studies like MRIs and CT scans can provide an entry point into structuring data, currently technologies currently leave a great deal of information on the table.
But clinical results and physician notes aren’t the only source of data important to treating the whole patient.  “Now we have these huge volumes of patient-generated health data to think about,” said Rogers.  “Everything from wearables to your home scale that uploads your weight to the internet to home monitoring of your diet or your activity.  There’s a whole world of PGHD, which roughly falls into the category of the Internet of Things, and we need to find better ways to make use of it.”
“Finally, of course, we have all of our ‘omics,’” he said.   “The beautiful thing about CancerLinQ is that it's starting to bring several of those pieces together.  Right now, it’s mostly clinical data, and a few extractions from the genomics – some of the markers that we know about today.”
“Integrating data across the four circles gives you that confidence that you are seeing the true state of the patient.  Intel really sees an opportunity in healthcare to bring this actionable data together and streamline it in a way that makes sense for a clinician and really gives them the ability to make informed, relevant decisions.”
Taking a standards-based approach to precision medicine
ASCO and its technology partners are taking data standards seriously as they try to bring multiple streams of big data together in an effective way.  Extracting data from the immensely varied ecosystem of EHR platforms is just as difficult for CancerLinq as for any other interoperability project, but Fitzpatrick believes that the problems can be solved with dedication, time, and a cooperative outlook.
“SAP is using standards-based techniques, so there’s nothing proprietary about our solution,” he said. “We are cutting HL7 interfaces into various EHR systems, some of which are more interoperable than others.”
But the lack of interoperability isn’t, as some stakeholders believe, a purposeful ploy to keep data locked up tight.  “I don’t think that anyone sets out to create an information silo,” he said. The people I meet in this industry are all committed to improving patient outcomes and providing durable and meaningful solutions, but everyone’s got so much on their plate.”
“I think that sometimes the export of data out of systems just hasn’t risen to the same level of urgency as other initiatives.  Demands are being made of everyone, from the providers to administrators to payers to health IT systems.  I think everyone wishes that they could respond more nimbly to all the requests and all the good and worthy projects that exist within their domains, but there just aren’t enough hours in the day.”
“But I have to say that I’ve been very impressed, pleased, and gratified by how helpful many of the EHR systems are when working with us so that clinicians are getting the full beneficial utility out of their systems,” he said.  “I’m confident we’ll get where we need to go.”
The future of CancerLinQ as a leader in precision medicine
Progress has been exciting and encouraging so far, Fitzpatrick added.  CancerLinQ is currently deployed at a number of facilities, and the waiting list to join includes more than 150 additional organizations, from community providers to academic medical centers to hospitals.
“We have hundreds of thousands of patient records that we have now collected into our database,” he said. “We are in the process of testing the data fidelity there, which as you know is always tough going when you’re taking data in from heterogeneous systems.”
“It’s early days,” he acknowledged. “I can’t give you a letter grade on how well we’re doing with this yet, but it is the essential work of CancerLinQ to get there. We’re not the only ones working on something like this.  There are initiatives in cardiovascular medicine and ophthalmology and elsewhere.”
“I think the oncology dataset has more nuance and complexities.  My colleagues from sister societies would dispute that, of course, but in a good-natured way. Right now, we’re trying to make sense of our direction and we’re working hard to ensure the fidelity of the data we have, now that it’s starting to flow.”
CancerLinQ will continue to give more and more providers the ability to learn from the experiences of their peers, a process that has so far produced truly meaningful results.  “We live in a cynical age, but I’m incredibly impressed that the ASCO members onboarding onto CancerLinQ are going through the trouble of doing this without being compensated for these efforts,” Fitzpatrick said. 
“They do it because they care about quality. They do it because they have never had a tool before that allows them to look across their populations in this fashion. They do it because they have never had an opportunity to have access to the collective experience of their colleagues, and they know how important this can be to improving those outcomes and giving patients a better chance at recovery.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsClinical Decision Support


