Stage 3 Meaningful Use Prompts Hopes, Concerns for MGMA

April 08, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 08, 2015 - Stage 3 meaningful use, the latest and greatest effort from CMS to bring sophisticated EHR technology, health IT interoperability, increased population health management, and improved data analytics to a weary, wary healthcare industry has been met with caution by the majority of stakeholders.
With more stringent reporting requirements, higher thresholds, stiff penalties, and big changes to the way health IT is certified and used, the Stage 3 proposed rule requires a great deal more effort from a provider community currently eyeing any number of administrative and technical obstacles, from the stagnant SGR repeal to ICD-10 to the ability to attest to Stage 2.
Robert Tennant, Senior Policy Advisor at the Medical Group Management Association (MGMA), sat down with HealthITAnalytics.com to discuss some of the major provisions of the proposed Stage 3 meaningful use framework, voice his concerns, and give his predictions about the future of the EHR Incentive Programs.
How do you feel about the elimination of the shorter reporting period and the move to a full-year attestation effort?
The good news in the rule is somewhat overshadowed by some concerning elements, the first being the all-year reporting period.  When you look at the program and its evolution, we clearly saw the need for a flexibility rule in 2014, and, of course, Dr. Conway at CMS has promised a flexibility rule forthcoming probably in the spring to address concerns with 2015 and Stage 2.
READ MORE: AMA: Real EHR Data in Med School Will Boost “Informatics IQ”
So, here they’ve gone backwards and said, “We will go all-year reporting, even for those EPs who are moving to Stage 3 for the first time.”  All-year reporting adds incredible pressure and burden to physician practices, because they have to get everything absolutely ready to go on January 1st from their vendor.  And, of course, with every other EP in the same boat, if a vendor doesn’t have the bandwidth to support their clientele, it can certainly be problematic for everyone.  So, the timing issue is a great concern to MGMA.
CMS has extended deadlines and allowed for increased hardship exemptions in the past.  Do you believe that this pattern of give-and-take will be repeated during Stage 3 meaningful use?
It’s kind of a strange way to develop public policy when you anchor everybody to a difficult target, and then throw them a bone a few months later to make them think they got a break.
But there’s a bigger issue here. Something important is happening in 2016, and it’s called a presidential election.  We’re going to have a brand new administration.  And as a student of politics, I can tell you that no new president comes in and simply says, “Oh, yeah, whatever policies my predecessor had, we’ll just continue those.”  That never happens, even if we stay within the same party.
So, the reality is that everything could change.  Add the SGR fix to that, if that gets passed…it’s really going to retool the entire scheme of quality reporting in medicine.
READ MORE: CMS Unveils Interoperability, EHR Clinical Documentation Changes
I hate to say it, but I look at this proposed rule almost like a placeholder.  And in the meantime, we’re still waiting on CMS to issue a regulation to increase the flexibility for Stage 2 in 2015, which was announced through a blog post earlier this year.  CMS intends to “reduce the administrative burden for EPs,” but we haven’t seen the regulation yet.  Instead, we get a rule that won’t take effect until 2018.
If you were looking at this from a logical perspective, which do you think should come out first?  Should it be a rule that is going to go into effect 2018 and that no doubt will change once the administration changes, or one that impacts physicians today, which is already overdue since the reporting period began in January?  Which rule should have come out first?
Maybe the Stage 3 proposal was just in the pipeline faster and they thought they would get it out.  But I think they should have waited until the dust settled on Stage 2 before they began to develop Stage 3.  That’s the mistake they made with Stage 2.  They rushed it out even before they had any feedback on Stage 1, and then they had to go back and make adjustments.  So we would have certainly preferred to see the flexibility rule issued first.
Do you feel that the increased thresholds for some of the Stage 3 measures, like patient engagement and electronic prescribing, are reasonable goals for providers?
Patient engagement is difficult enough, but the new 80 percent threshold for e-prescribing is a unique case. For many EPs, that threshold is not challenging.  Many of them have moved almost completely over to e-prescribing, but it can be an issue for some specialties that deal a lot with controlled substances, like pain management physicians.  Even though we’re making some progress, the industry isn’t quite up to par with e-prescribing of controlled substances.  The exclusions and exemptions really don’t deal with those specialties.
READ MORE: Health Data Exchange, EHR Dashboards Underpin a Successful ACO
They also don’t address the fact that there may be situations where the 80 percent mark can be problematic.  Let’s say I’ve gone to see my physician for a problem, and he says, “Rob, I’m going to write you this prescription.  You may not need it, so don’t fill it unless you need it.”
Well, you can’t do that with e-prescriptions.  And there are cases where people, frankly, don’t want to fill their medications, or they don’t have a pharmacy that they regularly use.  That makes it really difficult to know where to send the script.  So there are a lot of reasons why some physicians may have challenges meeting this 80 percent threshold.
Will Stage 3 meaningful use and the 2015 CEHRT Criteria address some of the complaints about the productivity burdens associated with EHR adoption?
I think what the industry has said to CMS and the ONC is that we need to focus on successful interoperability, and I’m not sure that meaningful use is necessarily the road that’s going to take us where we need to be.
The CEHRT rule provides the technical infrastructure for Stage 3 meaningful use, and it’s certainly an important guidepost.  But one of the criticisms in general, and it applies to these rules as well as every other meaningful use rule we’ve seen, is that there’s a complete lack of attention to EHR usability.
We’ve been hearing from our members that EHRs have become cumbersome, that there are so many screens and boxes to check that it’s almost mind-numbing as they try to go through all of the requirements of these programs while trying to treat the patient.  It’s becoming a situation where they’re required to meet these government mandates, but the interaction between the physician and the patient is being lost.
We’re going to continue to work with our industry partners on this, and we’ll certainly be pushing for changes during the comment period.  We want to inject a little common sense, for want of a better term, into the EHR usability problem.  We really need to look at workflows and how fast technology can assist the physician and not hinder the physician.  Will we get there?  I don’t know, but we’re certainly going to try, because the alternative is more of the same.  And that’s not working.
Stage 3 meaningful use is supposed to be the last phase of the EHR Incentive Programs, but health IT progress won’t stop when meaningful use does.  What do you think is next for the healthcare industry?
I think a lot of retirements, right?  CMS says in the rule that this is the last part of the program, but they also say that Stage 3 does not preclude the option of producing further stages. So I’m really not sure what direction they’re going to take after this.
All I know is that I was talking to a family member the other day who is a physician.  He has attested for meaningful use for three straight years.  He said, “Rob, I can’t think about 2018.  I have to be focused on the here and now, seeing patients and making sure I’m complying with the myriad of regulations that impact me today.  I can’t think about something that is out of my control and, frankly, out of the control of HHS with a new administration coming on board in early 2017.”
I can’t emphasize enough that all bets are off when a new administration comes in.  All of these programs that we’ve sort of taken for granted, from PQRS to patient-centered medical homes to ACOs…all of those were, for the most part, the brainchildren of the Obama Administration.  Regardless of what president comes in during the next election, they’re going to make changes according to his or her vision.  Things will be different, and the healthcare industry will have to adjust, because that’s the nature of politics.
Tagged Accountable CareEHR UseMeaningful Use


