What to expect at AHIMA 2014: ICD-10, analytics, and CDI

September 24, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 24, 2014 - Health information management professionals from around the country will be converging on San Diego next week for the 2014 AHIMA Convention, a chance for healthcare organizations to get the latest scoop on everything from ICD-10, clinical documentation improvement (CDI), computer assisted coding (CAC) and healthcare informatics best practices.  HealthITAnalytics will be bringing you real-time coverage as speakers and attendees focus on the following pressing issues facing healthcare today.
The imminence of ICD-10
It’ll come as no surprise that ICD-10 is at the top of the priorities list for HIM professionals.  Even though the implementation date has been pushed back until 2015, there is still much to do before next year rolls around.  Sessions will focus on creating transition plans for providers, evaluating and improving coder proficiency, and leveraging technologies such as computer assisted coding to ensure high-quality claims can be adjudicated.
Clinical documentation improvement
Dig Deeper
Administrative Support Atop Barriers to Nursing Informatics
How Big Data Velocity Informs Population Health, Patient Safety
Understanding the Many V’s of Healthcare Big Data Analytics
No mention of ICD-10 would be complete without a shout-out to clinical documentation improvement.  But good documentation is essential for much more than accurate coding: it is vital for clinical analytics, as well.  Speakers will address topics including quality assurance for EHR documentation, coaching physicians on documentation requirements, and of course, plenty of tips on how to prepare for the new coding environment of ICD-10.
Health information management and data governance
The wider world of health information management will also be on the table this year, with discussions and lectures on best practices for developing data governance programs and implementing new data rules that foster an environment of informatics and analytics.  Attendees will learn about the changing role of HIM professionals in the new health IT ecosystem and why each and every healthcare organization should have a strong foundation of data governance policies in place before big data becomes too overwhelming to tackle.
Patient engagement and population health management  
Making use of clinical and financial data to produce improvements in population health management and patient care is the next step in HIM.  Conference-goers will be able to sit in on sessions that address the best ways to involve patients in their care, including how to integrate patient-generated health data into the EHR and strategic ways to implement patient portals.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealthcare InformaticsICD-10


