60% of new ACA patients have already accessed primary care

July 11, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 11, 2014 - The Affordable Care Act seems to be having an immediate and impactful effect on the number of uninsured patients and those who could not afford to access primary care providers, according to new data from the Commonwealth Fund.  Sixty percent of patients who enrolled in ACA coverage during the first eligibility period have already visited a physician or filled a prescription, while 41 percent of patients seeking a new PCP adding that they were able to make an appointment within one week.  With the rates of uninsured patients dropping significantly under the new policy, population health management advocates will have new triumphs and new challenges ahead.
After the first open enrollment period, 9.5 million fewer adults were uninsured, dropping the uninsured rate from 20 percent to fifteen percent, with some of the greatest gains among young adults and minorities.  The young adult uninsured rate plummeted from 28 percent to 18 percent over the past year, while uninsured rates for patients of Latino heritage were cut from 36 percent to 23 percent.  In states that opted to expand Medicaid access, the number of uninsured patients living in poverty also dropped from 28 percent to 17 percent in one year.  There was no significant change in the 38 percent uninsured rate in states that did not expand Medicaid programs.
Among the 60 percent of newly insured patients who have taken advantage of their coverage, 62 percent said they would not have been able to afford the services before the program.  “Adults who are being helped the most are those who historically have had the greatest difficulty affording health insurance and getting the care they need,” said Sara Collins, the lead survey researcher and Vice President for Health Care Coverage and Access at the Commonwealth Fund. The results are encouraging for healthcare organizations suffering from emergency departments overcrowded by patients using the ED as a primary or urgent care facility, and also promises hope for organizations losing revenue due to non-payment from patients.
While the national data is still too new to reveal the impact on ED utilization, healthcare costs, or patient outcomes, a recent study in Massachusetts, an early adopter of widespread insurance coverage, showed a 3 percent drop in all-cause mortality since 2010, following a 2006 law that required healthcare insurance for everyone.  Deaths from heart attacks and cancer were reduced most significantly in the study, which may indicate that patients were receiving more routine screenings, better chronic disease management techniques, and better education on lifestyle choices from more frequent contact with the primary care system.
Tagged Accountable CareAffordable Care ActPopulation Health Management


