Mental Healthcare Big Data Warehouse Illuminates Care Trends

June 29, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 29, 2015 - For many healthcare providers interested in diving into the complicated world of big data analytics, a centralized repository or data warehouse is often the first step towards making sense of the petabytes of available information culled from EHRs, health information exchanges, claims data, medical devices, and continuity of care documents. 
Extracting actionable insights from these massive data sets is the ultimate goal for organizations that hope to turn their stores of information into a strategic business asset, yet they continue to struggle with the data integrity, normalization, and infrastructure requirements that can help them solve pressing problems with patient safety, care coordination, and population health management.
At the Centerstone Research Institute (CRI), a partnership between mental healthcare providers, researchers, policymakers, and big data analytics experts has produced the Knowledge Network and its National Data Warehouse project. 
With data from close to half a million patients across thirteen states, including 4.5 million prescription records, 1.9 million diagnoses, and 23 million service records, the National Data Warehouse is tackling mental health big data in a unique, collaborative way.
“Understanding, sharing and leveraging data helps us navigate the rapidly changing healthcare environment,” said Tom Doub, PhD, CEO of CRI. “Data sets like the National Data Warehouse are the first step in turning big data into actionable information that can help build better tools and programs that will improve our ability to prevent and treat mental illness and substance abuse.”
READ MORE: Understanding the Many V’s of Healthcare Big Data Analytics
“We look forward to partnering with providers and researchers to maximize how this information can benefit the millions of Americans with mental health and addiction disorders,” he added.
In a new white paper, CRI explains how the National Data Warehouse, which has been steadily growing since its inception in 2011, can turn disparate data sources into meaningful information that highlights trends in population health management, patient engagement, regimen adherence, and service delivery across a safety net population in need of comprehensive, quality care.
EHR data from participating organizations is loaded into the system on a daily basis in a standardized format.  Basic data, including demographics, payer information CPT codes “are further enriched with standard clinical dictionaries, NDC drug categorization, geographic coding, weather patterns, and other external data,” the brief explains.  Some organizations also contribute prescription data, patient outcomes and needs assessments, which contribute to CRI’s ability to extrapolate insights from the expanded data set.
Population health management relies on the ability to paint a portrait of needs, outcomes, and opportunities, which CRI demonstrates in its report.  For example, the big data warehouse can highlight patterns in diagnoses correlated with the age and gender of patients: boys under the age of 14 are experience nearly twice as many episodes of care for ADHD, while female patients aged 25 to 60 are significantly more likely to seek care for anxiety and depression.
Patients with diagnoses related to bipolar disorder or psychoticism tend to juggle significantly more prescriptions during an episode of care than patients with ADHD or substance abuse issues, yet patients with psychotic conditions are the most likely to keep the majority of their scheduled appointments.
READ MORE: The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
These insights help to demonstrate how useful healthcare big data analytics can be when a community of providers contributes information to a centralized pool, but the Knowledge Network does point out that the warehouse has certain limitations due to its tight focus on mental health data alone.
“Obviously the available data do not provide a complete picture of a patient’s health: the dataset only contains information from community mental health centers, and does not include hospitalizations or physical health information,” the report acknowledges.
“It also does not currently provide extensive clinical depth, as details about the specifics of mental health treatment are typically hidden in clinical notes or other unstructured data stores. The dataset also cannot be considered a full longitudinal view of a patient’s mental health services as it only captures events occurring at participating organizations during the time period covered by the project.”
Other challenges include a lack of data standards, including fragmented use of medical coding mechanisms like CPT codes, and data integrity issues stemming from inconsistencies in the self-reported information from participating providers.
Still, the warehouse shows the potential for organizational collaboration on big data analytics projects that leverage a centralized data source and standardized repository. As providers improve their population health management capabilities and begin to rely more heavily on community-sized big data, data warehouse projects that link disparate members of the care continuum will continue to mature and grow in importance and effectiveness as they generate the actionable insights providers need to deliver high quality, coordinated care.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsData StorageEHR Data Analytics


