Self-reported memory lapses may indicate later Alzheimer’s

September 30, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick

September 30, 2014 - While it may seem like a tired trope to associate getting older with ever louder complaints about memory loss, researchers at the University of Kentucky have found that providers and caregivers may want to pay attention when patients report misplacing their glasses or forgetting important dates. In a new study, 80% of patients who developed dementia during a twelve-year study had self-reported lapses in their memory long before they developed clinical evidence of Alzheimer’s disease, which may indicate an opportunity for providers to chart interventions and advanced directives before the patient is unable to participate in end-of-life care planning.
“What’s notable about our study is the time it took for the transition from self-reported memory complaint to dementia or clinical impairment – about 12 years for dementia and nine years for clinical impairment – after the memory complaints began,” said Richard Kryscio, PhD, chair of the Department of of Biostatistics and associate director of the Alzheimer’s Disease Center at the University of Kentucky. “That suggests that there may be a significant window of opportunity for intervention before a diagnosable problem shows up.”
More than a decade ago, Kryscio first asked 531 people averaging 73 years of age if they had had noticeable decreases in their capacity to remember facts and events in the prior year. The participants were then given annual tests to measure memory and thinking for an average of ten years. During the course of the study, 56 percent of patients self-reported changes to their memory starting at an average age of 82 years. Participants who admitted that their memory was deteriorating were almost three times more likely to develop dementia during the study, the team found. One-sixth of the patients enrolled in the study ultimately developed dementia. Eighty percent of those patients had originally reported decreases in memory.
The study has implications for the growing field of gerontology and elder care, which is becoming increasingly critical as the baby boomer generation ages into Medicare and requires significant investment from the healthcare system in chronic disease care, monitoring, and personal care services. Memory loss, dementia, and confusion strike up to half of senior citizens while hospitalized, making it difficult for providers to deliver care in accordance with their wishes.
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Communities Tackle Opioid Abuse with EHRs, Population Health
VA Falls Short on EHR Use to Document Suicide Risk, Prevention
Congress has asked CMS to take the matter of advanced directive planning in hand by improving reimbursement structures for the time providers spend on the important conversations, hoping to increase the number of patients who establish firm plans for their care before Alzheimer’s or dementia rob them of the ability to express their desires.
Patients may also want to take the study to heart and voluntary report a fading memory to their provider just as they would any other symptom of aging. “Certainly, someone with memory issues should report it to their doctor so they can be followed,” Kryscio said. “Unfortunately, however, we do not yet have preventative therapies for Alzheimer’s disease or other illnesses that cause memory problems.”

Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPatient CarePopulation Health Management


