Mass. AG to Expand Prescription Drug Monitoring Database

January 08, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 08, 2015 - Newly elected Massachusetts Attorney General Maura Healey will tackle the pervasive public health issue of prescription drug abuse by improving the state’s prescription drug monitoring program database and expanding the system’s interoperability with nearby regions.  In conjunction with increased police action and the help of community pharmacies to reduce overprescribing, Massachusetts authorities will attempt to leverage health IT to reduce the impact of overdoses and related crimes.
“Every day, families across Massachusetts are being torn apart by this epidemic,” said Healey. “We must lead the nation in confronting this public health crisis. I will build on our state’s many ongoing efforts and bring every resource I have to the table.”
The state will also work to develop public education and outreach resources that focus on the perils of prescription drug and opioid abuse, and will coordinate with private payers to increase the use of pharmacy “lock-in” procedures, where suspected doctor-shoppers will be required to only use a single pharmacy in order to prevent over-dispensing of controlled medications.
“These are concrete and definitive steps we can take – now – that will make a difference in addressing this crisis,” Healey said. “As Attorney General, I will work closely with my partners in government and law enforcement to quickly and effectively implement these changes.”
Dig Deeper
FHIR, Big Data to Support FDA Medical Device Development Network
CT Hospital, State Prescription Monitoring System Connect Via EHR
Big Data Analytics, Machine Learning Support 2017 Most Wired Hospitals
“As community pharmacists on the front lines of this public health crisis, we welcome Attorney General-Elect Healey’s commitment to tackling opiate and prescription drug abuse in Massachusetts,” added Todd Brown, Executive Director of the Massachusetts Independent Pharmacists Association. “We particularly support the AG-Elect’s plan to improve public education and expand the prescription monitoring program, which will save lives.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructurePatient Safety


