Preventative care aids 24% decline in strokes over 20 years

July 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 17, 2014 - An increase in screenings, better preventative care, and more robust population health management techniques have contributed to the significant decline in the number of strokes, and the number of deaths from strokes, over the past two decades, according to research from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.  First-time strokes have dropped by 24% in both of the last two decades, says Dr. Josef Coresh, and deaths following a stroke have decreased by 20% per decade.
“We can congratulate ourselves that we are doing well,” said Coresh, Professor of Epidemiology at Johns Hopkins, “but stroke is still the number four cause of death in the US.”  While the research, published in JAMA, suggests that providers have made positive strides, the study also “reminds us that there are many forces threatening to push stroke rates back up and if we don’t address them head-on, our gains may be lost.”
Coresh and his team used data from the long-term Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study, which has followed more than 15,700 patients between the ages of 45 and 64 since the 1980s.  Coresh looked at 14,357 of those patients who were stroke-free in 1987 and compared the data starting in that year to hospitalizations and deaths up to 2011.  Seven percent of those patients had a stroke within the study period.
Of those patients, ten percent died within 30 days, 21% died within one year, 40% within five years, and 58% died by the end of 2011.  The figures represent a decline of about 8 deaths per 100 cases, Coresh says, mainly due to stroke patients over the age of 65 surviving longer than previously.  The data also indicated that the results were similar across races and genders, but they aren’t sure how long the incident rates will stay relatively even.
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
Social Media May Provide Big Data Insights into Drug Misuse
State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
Better screenings and control of significant risk factors such as blood pressure, smoking, and high cholesterol have contributed to the reduction in deaths, but the skyrocketing prevalence of diabetes, especially among minority populations, may have worked against the gains in preventative care and advances in the way strokes are treated.  Stroke survival rates for African-American patients in particular are significantly lower than their white counterparts, while minority patients are twice as likely to be diagnosed with diabetes.
The researchers also found that the drop of stroke risk due to risk factor control was mainly found in patients over the age of 65, but rates among younger patients saw no improvement.  This may indicate that healthcare organizations should focus hypertension and cholesterol control efforts on younger populations in addition to the Medicare pool.
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsPatient CarePopulation Health Management


