Ohio, Florida create cancer HIE network for clinical analytics

May 30, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 30, 2014 - A partnership between The Ohio State University’s Comprehensive Cancer Center (OSUCCC) and Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Florida, has launched a cancer data health information exchange network intended to promote clinical analytics, speedier trials, and better outcomes for patients.  The Oncology Research Information Exchange Network (ORIEN), launched with the de-identified EHR and tissue data of more than 100,000 volunteer patients to create a “cancer research expressway.”
“Cancer is a highly complex disease, and potential breakthroughs have been stalled because we’ve lacked an efficient way to share incremental insights,” said Alan F. List, MD, president and CEO of Moffitt.  “Even more frustrating, until today we’ve had no system to quickly match cancer patients from anywhere in the country with ongoing clinical research with the most potential to help them,” he said.  “By partnering with The Ohio State University through ORIEN, we’ve built a cancer research expressway.”
“With ORIEN, we’re amassing a true national cancer database for the first time,” added Dr. Michael Caligiuri, director of the OSUCCC and CEO of the James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute.  “The collaboration across academic centers and with health care industry will not only help speed discovery, but will also provide patients with more personalized treatment options and ultimately, lead to better outcomes.”
OREIN will help to provide physicians with detailed data about the more effective patient-specific treatments in its “rapid learning” environment based on a technical infrastructure developed at Moffitt.  The collaboration hopes to expand to include other cancer research centers in the future, and its approach to clinical trial matching holds promise for pharmaceutical researchers to match drugs to participating patients and increase participation in critical trials.
Dig Deeper
Precision Medicine, Genomics Partnership Boosts Big Data Sharing
NIH to Bring Precision Medicine Data Collection to Patient Homes
Cancer Moonshot Report Showcases Precision Medicine Progress
Patients will be followed throughout their lifetimes to provide a long-term view of treatment outcomes and side effects, helping to continue the development of effective therapies on a personalized, genetic basis.
Tagged Big DataClinical AnalyticsHealth Information ExchangeMedical Research


