19 States to Receive CDC Funding to Improve Population Health

September 09, 2016

By Nathan Boroyan
September 09, 2016 - The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently announced funding for 19 state-based Disability and Health Programs geared towards identifying population health pain points and implementing a set of best practices to improve the health and quality of life of patients with mobility limitations and/or intellectual disabilities.
The funding will support three different types of Disability and Health programs, ranging from initiatives that have struggled to generate change for patients with disabilities to projects that are well-equipped to facilitate quality care improvements for targeted populations.
States with the most sophisticated programs, including Arkansas, Massachusetts, New York, and South Carolina, will use their expertise to mentor beginners about how to establish infrastructure and support improvement activities for patients with limitations.
These advanced performers will also utilize Medicaid data for population health management analytics to identify patterns in utilization for patients with disabilities.
Dig Deeper
Baltimore Population Health Plan Focuses on Racial Disparities
Dental Care is the Missing Piece of Population Health Management
97% Say Big Data Analytics Crucial for Healthcare Benefit Choices
In Kansas, which will participate in the mid-level Core Implementation Program, faculty and staff from the University of Kansas will work with organizations throughout the state to identify barriers to access of health programs for people with disabilities, and then implement intervention strategies to better serve this population
“There are programs out there across Kansas that are effective but just may not be accessible,” said Jean Hall, director of the institute for Health and Policy Disability Studies and principal grant investigator. “We want to help agencies and programs make sure they are accessible and help show their communities that as well."
The Kansas project will unfold in three phases. The first phase includes the formation of consumer advisory boards that include Kansans with mobility impairments and/or intellectual disabilities and their family members to discuss issues with health program accessibility.
The information gathered from the consumer advisory boards will then be used by researchers to develop and implement interventions to improve access to health programs. After that, researchers will then monitor the progress of the project and work with members of the community to improve the services and ensure that they continue after the grant expires.
"We want to address those disparities so everyone has the same access to health services and ultimately the same ability to improve their health outcomes," Hall said.
The CDC has previously funded a number of state disability improvement programs focused on promoting health equity, chronic disease prevention and improving the quality of life for people with disabilities. These programs' goals included improving infrastructure and capacity, increasing surveillance and monitoring activities, and effective monitoring and evaluating program activities.
In states such as Alaska and Delaware, programs focused on increasing technical support to improve accessibility to healthcare and community resources for people with disabilities.
Specifically, technical assistance in the Alaska program was geared towards providing support for existing community-wide initiatives. In Delaware, health care, fitness, and recreational providers and their facilities received help to improve accessibility and inclusion in health exams, exercise programs, and recreational activities.
Meanwhile, Florida's data-driven population health management program focused on increasing the size and quality of disability and health-related data and providing the epidemiologic capacity to analyze it. And in Michigan, analysts used surveillance data on disabilities to understand the status and prevalence of chronic disease.
Education and patient engagement is another major component of previously funded Disability and Health Programs. In Arkansas, for example, project leaders educated advocates about proposed health-related disability policy initiatives and distributing the information to policy makers.
In Oregon, Montana and Massachusetts, program activities included implementing educational workshops for people with disabilities. 
Overall, the CDC's state-based Disability and Health Programs help spearhead the transition to value-based care. By funding programs seeking to identify barriers to access to health programs and implement evidence-based strategies to better serve patients, the CDC is helping to reduce healthcare disparities between people with and without disabilities.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementPreventative Care


