Former Telemedicine Leader Founds Artificial Intelligence Group

March 26, 2018

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 26, 2018 - Jonathan Linkous, founder and former CEO of the American Telemedicine Association (ATA), is taking on a new role as the leader of a trade group dedicated to exploring the potential of artificial intelligence in healthcare.
The Partnership for Artificial Intelligence and Automation in Healthcare (PATH) will convene health systems, payers, regulators, and other industry stakeholders to discover how machine learning and AI can improve care delivery, reduce costs, and expand access to crucial services to a global population.
"AI and related innovations have already enabled industries such as banking, aviation, and entertainment to grow, provide higher- quality products, and allow consumers greater choice," said Linkous, a co-founder and CEO of the group.
Dig Deeper
EHR Users Want Their Time Back, and Artificial Intelligence Can Help
Population Health Tools May Benefit from AI, Machine Learning
AI for Imaging Analytics Intrigues Healthcare Orgs, Yet Starts Slow
"With spiraling costs, increasing need, decreasing resources, and rapidly advancing technologies, healthcare desperately needs to catch up."
The industry needs to understand how to deploy new technologies while overcoming the many familiar barriers to implementing innovative tools and strategies in the complex and fragmented landscape.
“Innovations must gain the support of a spectrum of decision-makers – healthcare providers, regulators, payers, and consumers,” says the group’s website.
“PATH is action-oriented, uniting stakeholders to identify the most critical technology innovations in automation, robotics, and artificial intelligence. This moves the field beyond research and innovation to enable an effective pathway for their adoption in the worldwide ecosystem of medicine.”
Co-founding the coalition is Mary Ann Liebert, who owns a respected publishing group focused on journals, books, and digital resources around telemedicine, healthcare transformation, big data analytics, and emerging precision medicine technologies like CRISPR.
"I am excited about the formation of PATH and look forward to combining forces to help bring these life-saving technologies to patients in need,” Liebert said.
The PATH advisory board includes other notable names from the provider, academic, and vendor communities, including Stephen Klasko, MD, MBA, President and CEO of Thomas Jefferson University And Jefferson Health, and Sue Siegel, Chief Innovation Officer at GE and CEO of GE Innovations.
Tagged Artificial Intelligence in HealthcareMachine LearningPrecision MedicineTelemedicine


