Hospitals turn to integration for analytics, population health

October 28, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 28, 2013 - As healthcare reform trundles onward, marrying improved technology systems with better data and a focus on accountability, health systems have been forced to take a closer look at how they do business, and how that business can aid in the larger goal of more coordinated, higher quality care.  For some organizations, the answer lies in clinically integrated networks (CINs) that bring the care continuum into closer alignment, with the potential for a more detailed look at patient populations from start to finish.  While the concept is nothing new, a recent survey by Kurt Salmon and Community Hospital 100 shows that providers across the country are teaming up to shoulder greater risk and share in the use of increasingly mature analytics infrastructures.
The survey of 118 C-level executives at a variety of hospitals showed that CINs are becoming increasingly commonplace.  Nearly 77% of respondents said that physicians and hospitals in their market were already working together to create an integrated delivery model.  A third of physician providers were working independently of their local hospital systems, as well.
Large regional health systems were leading the way, with 61% of participants noting that health systems are aiming to own most or all of the healthcare services in their network.  One quarter even plan to develop and market their own insurance products as a way to lower costs and maintain control over the majority of a patient’s activities.  One system means one rich source of analytics data, which 40.7% of CINs plan to develop into in-house infrastructures for population health management.  An additional 33% will outsource the work to create a shared network for analytics activities across the care continuum.
“In many ways, organizations are facing the same make-or-buy decision they faced a decade ago when deciding whether to develop in-house EHRs or use a vendor’s product,” the report says. “The same scenario will play out with data analytics as occurred with healthcare IT.”  The success of these analytics systems may come down to the lessons learned from EHR adoption: the importance of interoperability, national data standards, and an agile infrastructure ready to expand and support new activities as technology advances.
Dig Deeper
Financial Big Data Analytics Woes Plague Healthcare Providers, Payers
How the Healthcare “Value Chain” Leads to Big Data Analytics Success
Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
More than half of the survey’s respondents are convinced that the advent of CINs will help healthcare organizations achieve notable savings, but 14.8% believe that expanding the ownership of services will increase costs instead.  Still, 95% of hospitals will consider acquiring or employing physician practices, and 40% plan to employ more than half their referring primary care physicians over the next two years.  Smaller, rural hospitals refer to this as a “growth strategy”, while larger health systems view physician employment as a way to prepare for risk-based payments and population health initiatives.
“As these organizations form CINs with shared data capabilities and are obtaining access to claims data from the payers, a nearly complete understanding of a population’s utilization of health care services will become available,” the report predicts.  “Being able to use this big data to develop disease registries, trigger testing and screening protocols, and conduct predictive modeling and risk assessment will be key in being able to effectively manage the health of a population.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureFinancial AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data AnalyticsHealthcare Data StrategyPopulation Health Management


