Have EHRs Really Done Anything for Health IT Interoperability?

March 10, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 10, 2015 - Five skeptical Senators have taken issue with the healthcare industry’s $35 billion investment in EHRs and other technological infrastructure, using a Health Affairs blog post to question whether the EHR Incentive Programs have really helped further progress towards system-wide health IT interoperability and improved care quality for patients.
Citing “lackluster performance” when it comes to tasks that would generate meaningful health information exchange and large-scale population health management, the Senators chide the ONC for insufficient leadership and sluggish oversight when it comes to the immensely difficult process of collecting hundreds of thousands of disparate EHR systems into a seamless infrastructure.
The group, led by Senator John Thune, has been less than happy with the progress of meaningful use and other HITECH Act initiatives since 2013, when they released a white paper calling for a “reboot” of the meaningful use effort.  Thune, in addition to Senators Lamar Alexander, Pat Roberts, Richard Burr, and Mike Enzi, have become familiar figures in the debate over EHR adoption, and have been particularly dissatisfied with the fractured data exchange landscape that prevents providers from utilizing their investments to the fullest.
“After spending $28 billion so far of the $35 billion total taxpayer investment, significant progress toward interoperability has been elusive,” the Senators wrote.
“Stage 1 of the meaningful use program failed to include any meaningful health information exchange requirements, and lacked a vision to achieve interoperability. Instead, Stage 1 incentivized the widespread adoption of EHR systems that providers now say are difficult to use and lack the ability to exchange information without costly upgrades.”
READ MORE: As FHIR Matures, Healthcare Interoperability Comes into Focus
“We are now well into Stage 2 of the Meaningful Use program and providers are struggling to meet even modest health information exchange requirements,” the post continues.  Meaningful use participation in 2014 has been tepid, with just 25 percent of eligible hospitals and eligible providers attesting for either stage over the past three months.
CMS has been making participation easier by announcing several new flexible options and time extensions, and the ONC has released several health IT interoperability roadmaps to guide the industry through the next phase of infrastructure building.
“But the roadmap fails to outline real and actionable next steps,” the Senators point out. “It is not enough for ONC to identify factors it believes are important. It must also delineate how it will find specific solutions to these concerns.”
The ONC has been taking a multi-phase approach to achieving health IT interoperability.  Stage 1 meaningful use was intended to get the technology in place, while future efforts, laid out until 2025, will link these systems together to form the interoperable ecosystem of technology that will foster improvements to patient safety, quality, and population health management.
However, EHR technology certified by the ONC for meaningful use was supposed to be capable of achieving health IT interoperability in the first place, and neither the vendor community nor the ONC have been able to live up to that promise.  “The HITECH Act was clear: ONC is supposed to certify EHRs that can meet the program requirements for the meaningful use of EHRs,” Thune and his colleagues said.
READ MORE: ONC Views APIs as Key to Health Data Exchange, Interoperability
Congress has called on the ONC to decertify EHR technologies that do not actively encourage and allow for health IT interoperability, but providers would be the ones to suffer from learning that they health IT they spent years purchasing, implementing, and optimizing will no longer help them qualify for federal programs.
With funding for the HITECH Act running dry, how will providers be financially compensated for their worthless investments?  How will the federal government ever be able to convince them that wrestling a whole new wave of EHR technology into submission will really be worth it this time?
The Senators hope the ONC will come up with some answers to the most pressing health IT interoperability questions in a report requested in the 2015 budget omnibus.  “The report will give Congress a better understanding of the extent to which information blocking happens and a comprehensive strategy on how to address it. It will also provide a good example of how ONC exercises its oversight responsibility,” the Health Affairs post says.
So far, the positive impact of EHRs on health IT interoperability has been debatable.  Participation in the fragmented health information exchange landscape has been spotty at best, while the majority of providers still struggle to produce and transmit sufficient data for basic care coordination.  Complaints about the burdens of EHR technology continuously outweigh its praises, stymying efforts to take the next steps into big data analytics and improved utilization management that would have a more direct effect on patient outcomes.
“At the center of all this is the patient who must sit quietly in the exam room looking at her physician use a computer instead of directly talking with her, who likely has seen no better access to her own data, and who is struggling to understand why her doctor has such a difficult time getting her lab results,” the Senators conclude.
READ MORE: What Healthcare IT Users Don’t Really Need to Know about FHIR
“That the ONC roadmap recognizes these concerns is a welcome change. High-level ideas are important, but we are concerned that without specific requirements and action items, we will not advance towards the goal of improving health care coordination and patient care, which was the intent of the HITECH Act.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealth Information ExchangeInteroperability


