Geisinger Connects to PennREN HIE for Big Data Analytics

January 22, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 22, 2015 - Geisinger Health System is the first healthcare organization to go live on Pennsylvania’s Research and Education Network (PennREN), a $100 million broadband backbone running between a number of academic and public institutions, serving to foster health information exchange, long-distance education, and other community needs for residents of the state.  With founding members including the Hospital and Health System Association of Pennsylvania, the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Pittsburgh, and other notable organizations, PennREN hopes to speed big data analytics, clinical research, and care coordination across the region.
“Geisinger is a PennREN pioneer in the health care arena, and its connection to our high performance network will enable opportunities for innovation, such as transmission of big data for genomic research, telemedicine, video consultation, remote patient monitoring, and access to specialist care,” said Wendy Huntoon, executive director of the Keystone Initiative for Network Based Education and Research (KINBER), which has developed and managed the network.  “Healthcare providers can also use KINBER services to benefit from health information exchange or gain access to other services like disaster recovery and data centers, resulting in a more efficient and effective delivery of services,” she said.
Geisinger has long been a leader in medical research, population health management, and health IT development.  With its wide reach and thirst for patient data ready for analytics, its participation in the system seems natural.  The health system participated in a successful system test in December, in which a team from the University of Pittsburgh sent 175 gigabytes of deidentified genomic data to Geisinger, replacing the usual process of burning the data to a hard drive, which then needs to be securely shipped between locations.
“With GHS massively using genomics in its research and clinics, a dedicated high speed data transfer system like KINBER makes very large data intensive collaborations easier, either in receiving the data from the service centers or sharing the data across collaborators who are spread to institutions like Penn State University and the University of Pittsburgh,” said Raghu Metpally, PhD, a bioinformaticst at the Sigfried and Janet Weis Center for Research at Geisinger.
Dig Deeper
Change Healthcare Pushes Scale, Finds Value in Blockchain
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Health Data Exchange, EHR Dashboards Underpin a Successful ACO
“Geisinger wanted better connectivity for our researcher collaborators within the State of Pennsylvania: Bucknell University, University of Penn and the University of Pittsburgh to name a few,” said John Kravitz, vice president of information technology and associate chief information officer for Geisinger Health System. “With the flexibility of the KINBER Network we have the capability to establish redundancy with virtual internet connections via a single physical connection.  This allows us to connect to Philadelphia and Pittsburgh for research initiatives; if one connection fails we can failover to the other connection.  In the past we would have been connected solely thru an Internet point of presence in New York City with limited redundancy.”
PennREN got its start in 2010 with funding from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, and is now operational in 50 Pennsylvania counties.  Developing and strengthening broadband connections is a top priority for several other states, including Kentucky, which also aims to bring secure and reliable health information exchange and telehealth capabilities to rural patients by improving internet access.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsHealth Information Exchange


