Healthcare Big Data Analytics Suffers from “Fragmented” Approach

September 18, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 18, 2015 - Healthcare organizations are keenly aware that big data analytics is poised to change the way the industry operates, but few have developed comprehensive and integrated strategies to address the complex tasks of infrastructure development and workflow changes that will eventually support population health management and accountable care.
According to a new survey from the Deloitte Center for Health Solutions, fewer than half of healthcare organizations have a clear and integrated analytics strategy mapped out for the future, while one in four admitted that they do not have a data governance model in place.
“As health systems continue to face shrinking margins, tightening budgets, and evolving payment models, analytics are being touted as the missing key to unlock new sources of value,” the report says. 
In order to find success as the industry shifts to a greater reliance on value-based reimbursement and accountable care frameworks, “organizations will need to blend financial, operational, clinical, and other data to achieve their goals of improving quality, providing access, controlling cost, and managing provider networks,” the survey continues.
Value-based reimbursement and population health management remain strong drivers for healthcare big data analytics investment and innovation, Deloitte found, motivating nearly all of the participating organizations to improve clinical outcomes and slash unnecessary operational costs.  Organizations also see potential for using big data to improve the patient experience and delve into precision medicine and other research initiatives over the next three years.
READ MORE: What Are Precision Medicine and Personalized Medicine?
The majority of the fifty participating organizations are investing significantly in population health management and clinical management technologies.  Financial management and enterprise performance solutions are also in high demand. 
Fewer organizations are focusing on workforce or supply chain management, while just nine providers stated that they are interested in developing their market intelligence capabilities within the next twelve months.
Despite the widespread interest in obtaining actionable insights to raise quality and meet the challenges of emerging payment models, healthcare organizations are not taking a long-term view of their strategic objectives or developing comprehensive roadmaps to get them to their ultimate goals. 
“A fragmented analytics strategy will not support effective integration of data,” the report states. "While some leading organizations recognize the importance of committing to a coordinated business model and sufficient analytics investment, others are still figuring out their path.”
Fifteen out of the 50 organizations surveyed do not track their spending on analytics capabilities.  Only 30 respondents indicated that they have a clear strategy for future analytics technology deployment. 
READ MORE: IBM Watson, Siemens Partner for Population Health Management
Just over half of participants have centralized oversight of analytics architecture, budgeting, and support staff – leadership responsibility for these activities is fairly evenly split between the IT department and the business executive team.  Just six respondents have a Chief Analytics Officer on staff, though 75 percent have a dedicated department responsible for bringing data analytics to the rest of the organization.
This “fragmented” landscape is due to a number of familiar barriers, Deloitte says.  Cultural roadblocks and internal politics prevent more than half of respondents from engaging in analytics adoption to the degree they desire.  Confusion over project ownership and a lack of access to skilled employees stymied a similar number of providers.  Approximately half of organizations said their funding processes were cumbersome, while 23 noted that insufficient data quality was a major roadblock to progress.
Encouragingly, fewer organizations stated that a lack of tools and technology or a lack of access to necessary data constituted significant obstacles to big data analytics, perhaps indicating a certain level of progress towards the adoption of interoperable health IT solutions.
The survey also points out that organizations able to overcome these challenges do see success with their analytics programs.  Providers who lavish more spending on their big data programs and invest in more mature applications see measurable return on their investment, and report higher levels of satisfaction from their efforts. 
Seventy-nine percent of organizations stated that they have found success with predictive analytics and forecasting, while 41 percent are satisfied with their data warehousing capabilities. 
READ MORE: Artificial Intelligence Helps with Costs, Clinical Care at HIMSS18
“Based on the survey results, it appears that there is a relationship between the maturity of health system analytics programs and success with analytics,” the report says.
“Conversely, organizations that do not have an enterprise-level analytics strategy, structured data governance model, and coordinated analytics investments are less likely to achieve the same level of success with analytics. Many health systems have yet to take advantage of the capabilities that analytics can bring to meet their enterprise objectives.”
The report suggests that providers take several steps to bolster their big data analytics capabilities as the demands of value-based reimbursement make themselves felt.  Firstly, organizations should identify and engage a strong leadership team that can help implement a structured data governance model and enterprise-wide development strategy. 
Providers should also look to create meaningful value for business and clinical functionalities with their investments, while choosing tools that adhere to interoperability standards widely accepted by the industry.  While doing so, organizations should recognize that big data analytics and a population health management approach requires significant cultural change for systems historically reliant on a fee-for-service model, and should take care to appropriately train and engage staff in order to enact the necessary changes.
“In the coming years, the vast majority of health systems will need to respond to industry issues such as value-based care, consumerism, and increased regulation,” Deloitte concludes. “Enterprise analytics, if proactively managed with a focus on results, can help organizations address these and other operational challenges.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


