Researchers, clinicians must collaborate on data governance

October 01, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 01, 2014 - Researchers, clinicians, and health information management (HIM) professionals must all have a seat at the table when it comes to information governance, said Suzanne Paone, MBA, DHA, and Dilhari DeAlmeida, PhD, RHIA, of the University of Pittsburgh during a data analytics educational sessions at the 2014 AHIMA Convention on Tuesday. In order to create a collaborative but secure environment of data analytics for research trials and clinical care, providers should create joint policies through inclusive meetings with all the stakeholders who may need to access patient data for a variety of uses.
“Those of you who work with EHRs know just how difficult it is to work with reporting alone,” said Paone, who is Founder and Senior Executive Advisor of Enabling Solutions as well as an Adjunct Assistant Professor at the University of Pittsburgh School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences. “We’re not talking about reporting. When we’re talking about analytics, we’re not talking about writing reports off of an EMR database. We’re talking about moving along the analytics curve: descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive.”
At its core, information governance is the science of decision making in relation to data, Paone said, and requires organizations to specify decision-making rights and a framework of accountability throughout the life cycle of data, from creation to deletion. In order to maximize the usefulness of information during its life, governance projects should include a team-based approach to defining rules and access rights that include stakeholders from all areas of the data ecosystem: clinical, HIM, IT, financial, and even legal experts, all of whom can help to embrace health information as a critical business asset.
“I’ve learned everything I’ve learned about analytics, the good, the bad, and the ugly, from colleagues in other industries,” said Paone. “Manufacturing and service industries are very far ahead of us in their use of transactional data. What we don’t talk about a lot in healthcare is the idea of our information as an asset. At as patient level and a population level. So we can take better care of people on a population level if we understand our information as an asset.”
Researchers have long relied on this view of data as a key resource, and the University of Pittsburgh’s Center for Assistance in Research Using eRecord (CARe) initiative with the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center has allowed researchers a chance to help define governance practices and voice their key concerns.
READ MORE: The Role of Healthcare Data Governance in Big Data Analytics
“We try to get the research community to being in questions they would like the care team to address so they can work through the processes and protocols with them,” DeAlmeida said. She is an Assistant Professor in the Department of HIM at the School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, UPitt. “We’ve also launched a series where we have previous researchers to talk to the current research professionals about their experiences so that everyone can take some lessons from what they’ve seen as challenges and opportunities. I think it’s really important that the community knows what this model does and how it works.”
DeAlmeida and Paone described some of the information governance lessons CARe has learned while working on a pair of population health management studies revolving around blood bank data and diabetes complications, including the challenges of extracting data from multiple legacy systems to use for analysis.
“Everyone sitting in this room is dealing with if not one then ten or twenty legacy systems,” Paone said, eliciting a slew of resigned nods from the crowd. “It’s old as soon as it goes live, right? They’re difficult because they were designed to bill and now we’re asking them to do different things. They’re difficult because of strange access tools, and you have to hire people to dig around and get the right data from them.”
“When people start talking about data analytics, immediately people start to want to analyze everything,” she added. “The reality is that when you look at a warehouse, it’s going to be a tiny subset of what you really want to focus on. The hardest part is getting your leaders to sit down at a governance table and decide what’s important. Most sites don’t have the resources or the intestinal fortitude to analyze every piece of data in their environment. You just can’t. But many of the data sets you’re looking at for research are also valuable for clinical care. We’re talking about a village. There are no silos. These are very, very integrated projects.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsHealth Information ManagementHealthcare Data Strategy


