Poor sleep could lead to diabetes, heart disease in teens

March 07, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 07, 2014 - Despite the ongoing stereotype of teenagers as too lazy to do anything but snooze right around the clock, a large majority of adolescents taking part in a University of Michigan study about the effect of weight and sleep on chronic diseases failed to get even the minimum recommended amounts of rest on a daily basis.  Overweight teenagers in the study averaged seven hours a night, significantly less than the eight and a half recommended for their age group, and the inadequate slumber markedly increased their risk for cardiometabolic diseases.
Thirty-seven teenagers, aged 11 to 17 with higher than average body mass index (BMI) were fitted with 24-hour motion monitors to allow researchers to track their waking and sleeping hours along with their physical activity levels.  Only one third of the participants met the minimum recommended amount of physical activity, 60 minutes a day, and just 20% managed to get eight and a half hours of uninterrupted sleep.
These low levels of rest remained a strong indicator of risk for heart disease and Type-2 diabetes, even when the results were controlled for BMI and activity levels.  “The strong association between sleep duration and cardiometabolic risk score independent of the effects of body composition and physical activity suggest a potential influence of sleep duration on cardiometabolic health in obese adolescents,” says lead author Heidi Iglay-Reger, PhD, supervisor of the Physical Activity Laboratory at the Michigan Metabolomics and Obesity Center.
While the study couldn’t determine whether lack of sleep causes cardiometabolic syndromes or if diabetes and obesity led to disturbed sleep, the research suggests that screening overweight adolescents for sleep disorders or deficiencies to help form a more complete portrait of the patient’s overall health.  Further studies are necessary to see if increasing sleep quality will help decrease the risk of chronic metabolic and cardiac conditions.
Dig Deeper
Kaiser Permanente Program Reduces Cardiovascular Disease Risks
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Gates Foundation Grants $279M to UW Population Health Program
In an unrelated study, obesity in adult patients was noted to cause longer hospitalizations and higher costs when overweight patients presented to the emergency department with chest pain, with morbidly obese patients incurring 44% higher costs and 24% longer hospital stays than patients of normal weight.  With more than a third of US patients suffering from obesity, the effort to stem chronic diseases resulting from high BMI and poor nutrition is critical for reducing health system costs and encouraging better health.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementHealthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


