Four Population Health Management Steps for Safety Net Patients

January 27, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 27, 2016 - Achieving the Triple Aim of healthcare starts with a firm foundation in patient-centered population health management, which can help to improve patient satisfaction and lower unnecessary spending. 
But providers across the care continuum, from primary care to inpatient facilities to specialty and behavioral health organizations, are constantly struggling to understand how to best connect with their patients, especially those in difficult socioeconomic situations, those of different cultural or linguistic backgrounds, and those with complex, ongoing needs.
As healthcare organizations seek to reduce costly preventable readmissions, improve chronic disease management, boost patient engagement, and lower overall spending, they must invest in the tools and education required to develop robust and effective population health management programs.
CMS and the American Hospital Association have both recently released guidance on preventing hospital readmissions and creating a patient-centered care delivery system that places patient-provider relationships at the forefront of the care coordination process.
What are the four foundational steps that providers must take to see success with their population health management strategies?  How can these principles improve the health and wellbeing of the patients who are most likely to return to the inpatient setting due to inadequate support in the community?
READ MORE: What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Understand the social, cultural, behavioral determinates of health
At the root of meaningful population health management is cultivating a thorough understanding of the challenges holding back patients from achieving optimal health. 
Thanks to the ongoing transition to value-based reimbursement and accountable care, there is a growing recognition within the healthcare community that social, behavioral, economic, and even geographical barriers have a major impact on a patient’s ability to remain adherent to his medications, keep appointments, or understand discharge instructions – and that bridging these gaps is now a responsibility of providers themselves.
In its new Guide to Preventing Readmissions among Racially and Ethnically Diverse Medicare Beneficiaries, CMS suggests that providers “create a strong radar” for circumstances that may limit a patient’s ability to take charge of his or her own health.  These issues may include racial and ethnic status, primary language and English proficiency, educational levels, the availability of social and community support, a patient’s disabilities, and the status of their relationship with primary care.
Numerous studies have shown gaping disparities in health status and patient outcomes when populations are stratified by ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status.  These factors often originate in the community, but may be exasperated by the actions of providers, as well.
READ MORE: Adult Vaccine Project Produces Population Health Best Practices
Healthcare providers should begin the process of lessening this divide by collecting basic data on their patients and the surrounding community.
“This information can be gathered routinely at registration, updated routinely, and used to do predictive modeling for readmissions, or readmission ‘hot spotting’ in order to address factors that can preempt avoidable readmissions in diverse populations,” the CMS guide says.
Assess the barriers and design appropriate interventions
Once an organization has developed its “radar,” providers can move into actionable patient risk stratification, which can then help to inform changes to the care coordination process.
“For example, if it is determined that certain racial and ethnic groups are more likely to be readmitted, factors such as mistrust, different cultural beliefs, language barriers, or health literacy can be targeted through a series of interventions, including provider training, organizational trust-building, interpreter services, navigators, health coaches, simpler discharge information, et cetera,” CMS says. “Systems innovations and improvement becomes the natural outgrowth of a strong radar that picks up clear root causes.”
READ MORE: CMS Equity Plan Promotes Data Analytics, Population Health
A new report from the American Hospital Association (AHA) highlights four major requirements of every patient-centered population health management program:
Shared knowledge and shared decision making.  Clinicians must partner with their patients to provide impactful education that will encourage positive actions and improved patient engagement.  To do this, clinicians must be culturally aware and place an appropriate value on the patient’s individual background, beliefs, and experiences.
Team-based, collaborative care.  When it comes time to make decisions about the patient’s treatment, clinicians should view the process as a collaborative effort, and involve caretakers and family members to a reasonable degree.  Providers must be sure to consult other members of the patient’s care team, as well, to ensure that their instructions to do conflict with other treatment plans.
Cultural sensitivity and respect.  Patients may not always know what’s best for them, but when a decision is related to a cultural norm, religious belief, or lifestyle choice, clinicians must approach the issue with respect, sensitivity, and understanding.  Providers must understand where the patient is coming from if they wish to make effective recommendations.
Incentives for better choices.  Just as value-based reimbursement is changing the way healthcare organizations think about decision-making, incentives can influence patient behaviors, too.  “Hospitals and care systems need to design incentives that encourage and develop individual responsibility and accountability for healthy behaviors and a healthy lifestyle,” the AHA says, if they wish to motivate their patients into making the best possible choices.
Once these foundational guidelines are in place, providers can begin to actively improve care management services. “Start from the start,” CMS says, to avoid gaps in care management that may lead patients to fall away from their regimens.
“Familiarity with the root causes should lead to a series of preemptive efforts that span the duration of pre-admission to post-discharge,” states CMS.  “Every hour counts, and creating systems that assess risk prior to admission, addressing these factors in a planned way at admission and throughout hospitalization, and assuring they are covered at discharge, is starting from the start.
“Building trust, bridging cross-cultural divides, creating new lifestyle management and adherence patterns, and effectively educating, for example, all take time, and the sooner you start, the better.”
A successful care intervention must leave the patient with a thorough understanding of three things: his diagnosis, the care he is receiving or must receive in the future, and the steps he must take after discharge to continue his treatment, such as which provider to call or what medications to take. 
Providers can use various health IT strategies to achieve these goals, including the patient portal, remote monitoring or Internet of Things devices, and health information exchange between specialists, pharmacies, community service organizations, and other care partners.
Provide tailored support and resources from hospital to community
The link between the inpatient setting, outpatient ecosystem, and the community at large must be well-developed and continuously improving.  Currently the challenges of communicating across care settings are significant, and not even many of the most integrated delivery networks – accountable care organizations – have solved the problem.
The technical obstacles of poor EHR interoperability, combined with a lackluster focus on the role of the community in population health management, have historically made it difficult to generate coordinated participation from all members of the care team.
But both CMS and the AHA urge providers to be the ones to reach out and start to develop changes.  “Hospitals can serve as conveners and enablers in primary care delivery…. hospitals should form effective partnerships with the community and patients in a way that provides the infrastructure primary care teams need to deliver quality care,” the AHA said in a 2013 report.
“Community partners are also sometimes equipped to address non-medical factors that could lead to readmissions such as behavioral, health literacy, and cultural issues,” CMS adds. “In places where these partnerships already exist, hospitals could focus on strengthening and maximizing their benefit. Coordinating all these efforts will separate success from failure.”
Undertake the challenge of continuous follow-up to prevent relapses
Preventable 30-day readmissions are a key quality indicator for many public and private programs, and are often used as the benchmark to determine the success of a holistic population health management strategy. 
Patients can benefit from nearly any type of post-discharge care coordination plan, whether providers are flagging those with specific behavioral health conditions, smoothing communication amongst themselves, or just providing simple, comprehensible medication adherence instructions in the patient’s first language. 
High-risk readmissions patients come from all age groups, health statuses, and walks of life, and may not always be the most obvious candidates.  While big data, predictive analytics, and advanced risk stratification tools can help organizations focus their efforts on the neediest patients, providers should institute a baseline care coordination and discharge planning program that is comprehensive, low-cost, and applicable to all patients if they wish to achieve the best results. 
Providers may also explore making a particular effort to exchange standardized admission, discharge, and transfer (ADT) data with local primary care or hospital partners.  Using state-level health information exchanges, smaller regional software links, or secure messaging protocols like Direct, healthcare organizations can ensure that patients do not get lost once they take off their identification bracelets.
While these care coordination strategies may not typically fall under the “quick wins” category that most hospitals aim for, the longer-term rewards of keeping patients out of the hospital will manifest themselves through value-based reimbursement bonuses and fewer penalties for hospital quality shortfalls.
“A key part of value is identifying areas where there are inefficiencies and waste, current investments we’re making where we aren’t getting a good return, and disparities are a great example of this,” CMS concludes. “Preventing readmissions sits squarely at this intersection. In sum, as part of our care redesign, we must assure that we are prepared to deliver high-value healthcare to a diverse patient population.”
“Our nation is becoming increasingly diverse and the newly insured will mirror this diversity. If we are progressive, thoughtful, and truly gearing up for success, a new health care system that is high-value, equitable, culturally competent, and delivers quality care to all is well within reach.”
Tagged Accountable CareBest PracticesChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementPrimersSafety Net Patients


