EHR Diagnostic Codes for Diabetes Improve Care Quality

November 11, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
The use of EHR data registries is critical for providing chronic disease management services for patients with diabetes.
November 11, 2014 - Using a dedicated diagnostic code within the electronic health record (EHR) to identify diabetes is associated with higher levels of care and a greater ability to identify and diagnose patients with abnormal lab values, finds a study from the Canadian Medical Association Journal (CMAJ), which examined more than 11 million electronic records from 9000 clinics across the United States.  By using an algorithm to flag potentially diabetic patients who were not receiving treatment, the researchers found that 5.4% of patients with diabetes may have the disease without knowing it.
“With the increasing adoption of EHR systems across the US, it should be ever more feasible to use EHR databases to monitor and possible improve care processes and clinical outcomes,” the study says.  “This approach is dependent on the creation and maintenance of electronic diabetes registers, which form the basis for recall, audit, and point-of-care reminders.  Application of an electronic code for diabetes automatically enters a patient into the register and is the most basic requirement for structured, proactive care under this model.”
The researchers found that only 61.9% of the 1.1 million patients with diagnosed diabetes were included in EHR registries intended to aid population health management.  The remaining 38.1% of patients were identified due to medication histories, but did not have a standardized code applied to their records.  Those patients were, therefore, left out of the database.  Of the remaining 10 million patients, 0.6% showed evidence of undiagnosed diabetes on the basis of abnormal glucose or HBA1C test results.  “The prevalence of undiagnosed diabetes identifiable in this way increased with age,” the study notes, “exceeding 1% among patients 65 years of age or older, and exceeding 2% among those 75 years or older.”
Dig Deeper
Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
Physician-Level Data May Not Reduce Opioid Prescription Rates
Research Collaboration to Use Big Data for Diabetes Prevention
Even among patients who had their diabetes defined by an electronic code and were aware of their diagnosis for at least 15 months prior to their last recorded visit, ongoing chronic disease management showed room for improvement.  Patients who were identified by their medication use alone had fewer records of important quality and health indicators such as body mass index and blood pressure.
While 54.2% of patients with a coded diagnosis had BMI records in their chart, only 49.2% of patients identified algorithmically had the same.  Just 40.4% of medication-only patients had a record of HBA1C testing, compared to 49.8% of coded diagnosis patients. Those patients identified by their medication use alone also had lower levels of hypertension control and lower levels of blood glucose control.  They were 20% less likely to have had a recent record of their total cholesterol, and also experienced high cholesterol more often.
“Patients with a coded diagnosis of diabetes had a higher quality of care than those with uncoded diabetes,” the study concludes.  “Organizational context may determine the potential for using primary care records to identify undiagnosed diabetes and to monitor quality of diabetes care.  But wherever electronic diabetes registers are used to support the provision of care, and where blood glucose levels, HBA1C, and quality of care data are recorded in the same system, it should be possible to identify readily (and at low cost) individuals at risk of their diabetes going undetected and those receiving suboptimal care.  The use of electronic diabetes registers is central to this opportunity.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


