Family Caregivers Significantly Improve Transitions of Care

November 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
The presence of family caregivers is associated with a higher rate of successful post-hospitalization interventions, a new study finds.
November 03, 2014 - Hospitalized patients who had attentive caregivers present during discharge and transition of care activities were significantly more likely to complete post-hospitalization interventions and achieve smoother adjustments back into the home environment, according to a study in the American Journal of Managed Care.  Patients who had family caregivers present during the process of leaving the hospital were five times more likely to complete post-discharge activities intended to prevent 30-day readmissions.
“Good communication among hospital providers, patients, and aftercare clinicians at hospital discharge is associated with better health outcomes and lower costs,” write the authors after conducting an intervention study in Rhode Island that enrolled patients in a Care Transitions Intervention (CTI) program.  The program assigns a transition coach to a patient and his or her caregiver who home visits and follow-up telephone calls for 30 days after discharge. “Family caregivers’ efforts can enhance patient engagement, yet formal involvement of family caregivers in post hospital communications has been historically underemphasized. For these and other reasons, quality improvement agencies promote inclusion of family caregivers in the inpatient clinician-patient partnership.”
The researchers found that a face-to-face visit within three days of discharge followed by two phone calls within 30 days of discharge were more effective in helping patients reenter the home environment when the patient had the aid of a family member or other concerned person to help them along.  Out of a target population of 2,747 patients, 56% consented to participate in the program.  Patients who had caregivers present when approached for enrollment were much more likely than other patients to agree to participate.  They were more likely to be older and male and less likely to be dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, the study found.
Among the 1540 patients who took part in the program, 37% received the initial home visit.  Overall, patients with caregivers were five times as likely to accept the transition coach’s visit as those who were on their own, while male patients with caregivers were eight times more likely to complete the intervention as those who lacked family support.
Dig Deeper
Vendors Push Big Data Analytics, but Hospitals Focus on Safety, Security
Brown Gets $1.1M to Study Medicare Post-Discharge Care Quality
CMS Selects 516 Orgs for Population Health Management Program
“These results suggest that including caregivers in recruitment for hospital aftercare coaching and/or including caregivers at the time of coaching may be associated with increased patient agreement to participate in the intervention and may be a feasible way to increase overall patient participation in the hospital and after discharge,” the study concludes.
“When including family members of hospitalized patients in clinical quality improvement or research, it is important to note reports that caregivers experience stress and other symptom, steps should be taken to assess caregiver strain concurrently while partnering with caregivers to improve patient care. Additional research is needed to assess the benefits of formally including family caregivers in post hospital coaching interventions.”
Tagged Care CoordinationHospital QualityPopulation Health Management


