NIH Seeks $1.1B to Fund Precision Medicine, Cancer Moonshot

April 08, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 08, 2016 - The Precision Medicine Initiative and Cancer Moonshot may be two of the most exciting programs in the world of medical research, but their promises for clinical care certainly won’t come cheap. 
During testimony at a Senate health appropriations subcommittee hearing this week, National Institutes of Health (NIH) Director Dr. Francis Collins stated that these two initiatives, as well as the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) program, will require an investment of more than one billion dollars from the federal budget.
“Capitalizing on the alignment of scientific opportunities created by advances in genomics, the widespread adoption of electronic health records, the recent revolution in mobile health technologies, and the emergence of computational tools for analyzing large biomedical data sets, precision medicine is poised to usher in a new era in how we treat and diagnose disease,” Collins said.
The NIH is one of the federal organizations leading the development of the Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI), a national effort to use genomics and big data analytics to develop personalized treatments for many difficult-to-treat conditions.
At the core of the PMI is the Cohort Program, which hopes to enlist at least one million patients to contribute their genomic, demographic, and clinical data for research purposes. 
READ MORE: Cancer Moonshot Unveils 10 Big Data Tasks for Curing Cancer
“A cohort of this size will capture data on a wide range of diseases and be large enough to detect genetic and environmental effects that are difficult to discern from research on smaller groups,” Collins explained.
“Scientists will be able to use data from this cohort to identify trends and understand health and disease on a much larger scale, and that will lead to new ideas for diagnostic tests, treatments, and prevention strategies.”
In addition to constructing the PMI Cohort and overseeing a collaborative research community that include government organizations, private research institutions, vendors, and healthcare providers, the NIH has two more major projects on its plate.
The Cancer Moonshot, introduced by Vice President Joe Biden earlier this year, seeks to reduce the devastating burdens of cancer by designing new strategies for prevention, diagnoses, treatments, and cures.  Specific goals include the development of a cancer vaccine, new approaches to early detection, single-cell genomic profiling of cancer cells, and advances in combination therapies.
The BRAIN initiative plans to make similar breakthroughs in the area of neurological disorders and neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. 
READ MORE: VA Precision Medicine Databank Hits 500,000 Participants
“This bold, multi-agency effort to revolutionize our understanding of the human brain will enable the development and use of innovative technologies to produce a clearer, more dynamic picture of how individual cells and neural circuits interact in both time and space,” said Collins.
“By measuring activity at the scale of neural networks in living organisms, we can begin to decode sensory experience and, potentially, even memory, emotion, and thought.”
Collins added that the technologies and therapies developed under this program may help to unlock a new understanding of the brain’s fundamental pathways, offering hope to patients with a number of other conditions, such as autism, epilepsy, traumatic brain injuries, and addictions.
The Fiscal Year 2017 budget includes an additional $100 million for the PMI Cohort Program, bringing the total to $230 million, as well as $195 million for the BRAIN initiative and $680 million for the National Cancer Moonshot, Collins said.
“The FY 2017 budget request will enhance NIH’s ability to support cutting-edge research and training of the scientific workforce,” said Collins. “The budget request allocates resources to areas of the most extraordinary promise for biomedical research, while maintaining the flexibility to pursue unplanned scientific opportunities and address unforeseen public health needs.”
READ MORE: Cancer Moonshot Report Showcases Precision Medicine Progress
With this additional funding and commitment from partnering agencies and the healthcare community at large, the NIH plans to meet the four major objectives laid out in its five-year strategic vision.
The goals include advancing biomedical research opportunities, fostering innovation in the fight to eradicate diseases, enhancing scientific stewardship through partnerships and grant programs, and promoting scientific excellence by refining and improving the research process.
During his opening statement at the hearing, Senator Roy Blunt (R-MO), expressed strong support The Precision Medicine Initiative, Cancer Moonshot, and BRAIN Initiative, as well as other research work undertaken by the NIH.
“This is the time to make research funding a national priority. I strongly believe in the promise of medical research,” he said. “It represents hope for millions of patients who suffer from conditions ranging from cancer to kidney disease. NIH-funded research has raised life expectancy and improved the quality of life for all Americans.”
“I believe we must seize the opportunity this year to start a pattern of sustained increases for the National Institutes of Health. It is time for a long-term commitment to medical research.”
Tagged Medical ResearchPrecision MedicinePrecision Medicine Initiative


