Healthcare Big Data Analytics Aids Financial IT Benchmarking

October 30, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 30, 2015 - Healthcare providers worried about the ongoing costs of implementing, optimizing, and maintaining information technology systems must have an accurate and effective way to gauge the expenses of their initiatives in a standardized, meaningful way. 
The use of inconsistent data sources and the application of arbitrary “high cost” or “low cost” labels can prevent organizational executives from gaining the insight they need to make optimal strategic decisions, says the Scottsdale Institute (SI) in a new article published in the Journal of Health Information Management.
To combat these deficiencies, the Scottsdale Institute has developed a two-part financial benchmarking system that leverages big data analytics techniques to provide organizational leaders with the information they need to cut costs and improve efficiency.
“In this post EMR environment and with meaningful use incentives winding down, budgetary pressures are at an all-time high for CIOs,” said Shelli Williamson, Executive Director, Scottsdale Institute, a non-profit coalition of health systems that have made health IT a top priority.
“Our Benchmarking Program is a critical tool for CIOs leading an effort to optimize costs over the next five to 10 years. The program also enables individual, private networking and provides tools for Board-level conversations.  Any health system may participate, and there is no cost.”
READ MORE: Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
Started in 2006 as a collaborative effort to help healthcare CIOs better compare health IT spending across multiple systems, the Benchmarking Program includes a big data collection tool and an anonymized benchmarking database.  Participating providers use the tool to contribute their health system’s data to SI’s centralized system. 
After SI evaluates and normalizes the data, the provider then receive access to the benchmarking database so they can compare their information with results from competitors.  Notable users of the system include Banner Health, Henry Ford Health System, Intermountain Healthcare, and Trinity Health.
“Users are provided with comparisons based on the raw data originally provided by the site and on the ‘normalized’ data generated from the database tool,” explain authors David C. Classen MD, MS, CMIO at Pascal Metrics and an Associate Professor of Medicine at the University of Utah, Jason Fortin, Senior Advisor at Impact Advisors, which collaborated on the article.
“The statistics resulting from the comparison process are size independent,” Classen and Fortin continue, and may include critical metrics such as IT expenses as a percentage of total organizational spending, IT cost per adjusted patient data, and IT capital as a percentage of organizational capital.
If a particular data point grabs a provider’s interest, the organization may request an introduction to the anonymous health system that delivered the information, the article adds.  If the other organization agrees to be identified, the two systems may begin a discussion or provide more details about certain aspects of their operations.
READ MORE: Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
This approach has sparked several new collaborations between participants, Classen and Fortin note.  “Both a large health system CIO group and a large academic medical center CIO group are now sharing specialized comparative reports across their respective peer groups in addition to making use of the one-on-one reporting capability.”
The benchmarking program has been well received by the majority of participants as executives start to feel the pressure of being more accountable for their efficiency and strategic decisions.  With IT costs skyrocketing thanks to mandatory investments such as a certified EHR to meet meaningful use requirements, understanding exactly where every dollar is going – and how competitors are faring as they wrestle with the same problems – is a critical advantage for budget-minded organizations.
When SI fielded a user survey, the vast majority of participants said that the SI Benchmarking program allowed them to access a clearer picture of their costs relative to other organizations.  Ninety-three percent are using the tool to identify areas of marked cost variance, while 72 percent are diving more deeply into the reasons why these variances are occurring.
“The IT cost benchmarking service has been a great service that CIOs have found significant value and benefit from,” said Brent Snyder, CIO, Adventist Health System. “In comparing costs with other entities, most other databases don’t identify what’s being supported in the IT budget. SI’s design seems to provide a nice middle ground. It segments the organizations into relevant groups so you can see which organizations are at about the same level of clinical IT development as yours, or who are using the same vendors.”
Approximately 80 percent of respondents said they use the tool to inform senior executives about how their organization compares to others.  Forty-one percent have used the database to create internal dashboards that facilitate reporting.
READ MORE: Revenue Cycle Analytics Enable Value-Based Care for Pediatrics Group
Both the raw data and the normalized information are highly valuable for these processes, participants added.  Eighty-three percent said they appreciate access to the raw information.  Close to seventy percent use the raw data to perform additional reporting not included in the packaged tool.
“The SI Health IT Benchmarking Program is unique because it is a collaborative,” the article says. “The data is never resold; it is only collected so it can be shared between participants and used to make meaningful comparisons.”
“Additionally, unlike virtually every other IT benchmarking service in healthcare, participation in the SI program is free and without any obligation. There is no charge for hospitals and health systems to use the database, and membership to SI is not required.”
For more information about participating in the program, please click here.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsFinancial AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


