CMS Seeks Providers for Comprehensive Primary Care Initiative

August 02, 2016

By Sara Heath
August 02, 2016 - The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) is accepting applications for practices to participate in its new Comprehensive Primary Care Plus (CPC+) delivery model.
According to a press release, the agency is looking for approximately 5,000 practices in 14 regions to participate in the new primary care model, helping to deliver quality care to nearly 3.5 million patients.
CPC+, which was unveiled in April, focuses on delivering quality care by prioritizing chronic disease management and population health management. By reframing primary care incentive payment models, CMS hopes to give practices the flexibility necessary to provide quality, preventive care to critical populations.
The model also targets treatment of the whole patient, encouraging physicians to support patients outside of the doctor’s office through population health management strategies.
Dig Deeper
CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
Developing Community Partners for Population Health Management
NH Population Health Management Program Cuts Overdoses by 34%
This additional outreach will likely take various forms depending upon the practice population. However, because of the payment structure of this program, practices will ideally have the freedom to take on their own unique strategies.
“By supporting primary care doctors and clinicians to spend time with patients, serve patients’ needs outside of the office visit, and better coordinate care with specialists we can continue to build a health care system that results in healthier people and smarter spending of our healthcare dollars,” said Patrick Conway, MD, CMS deputy administrator and chief medical officer.
According to CMS, the flexibility CPC+ grants to practices will enable them to do the following for their patients:
Support patients with serious or chronic diseases achieve their health goals
Give patients 24-hour access to care and health information
Deliver preventive care
Engage patients and their families in their own care
Work together with hospitals and other clinicians, including specialists, to provide better-coordinated care
Through incentive payment reform, CMS intends for practices to shape their care to the needs of individual patients. Because all payers – including Medicare, Medicaid, and participating private payers – are buying into the reformed payment model, practices will have the freedom to pursue the necessary population health management initiatives to support the needs of their patients.
“As a key part of CPC+, CMS and partner payers are committed to supporting primary care practices of all sizes, including small, independent, and rural practices,” Conway said.
“We see CPC+ as the future of primary care in the U.S. and are pleased to partner with payers across the country that are aligned in this mission to transform our health care system. This model allows primary care practices to focus on what they care about most – serving their patients’ needs when and how they choose.”
CPC+ will include two tracks. The first entails a monthly CMS payment, as well as regular Medicare fee-for-service payments.
The second track is better suited for primary care practices that are further on the road toward value-based care. These practices will also receive a monthly payment from CMS. However, they will not receive regular Medicare fee-for-service payments. Instead, they will receive a hybrid of fee-for-service payments and up-front comprehensive primary care payments.
Practices in both tracks will receive prospective value-based incentive payments that they will either keep or have to return to CMS as the end of each month based on practice performance. CMS says this will help facilitate the transition to value-based care by incentivizing comprehensive care, chronic disease management, and population health management.
CPC+ is planned for a January 2017 start date, and applications are due by September 15.
Dig Deeper:
3 Population Health Management Strategies to Cut Health Costs
92% of Providers to Use CMS Chronic Disease Management Program
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementPrimary Care Services


