Care Coordination Hampered by Inadequate Discharge Summaries

January 16, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 16, 2015 - Hospitals do not always provide complete, timely, and accurate discharge summaries to physicians in order to improve patient care coordination for those with heart failure, finds a new study from Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes, a journal of the American Heart Association.  The vast majority hospitals lack at least some of the seven basic Transitions of Care Consensus Conference elements that should be included in a discharge summary, and only one third of providers documented transmission of a patient discharge summary to his or her primary care physician.
With care coordination becoming a more central feature of accountable care, the lack of adequate health information exchange is worrisome for those on the line for outcomes-based financial impacts.
Patients hospitalized for heart failure often leave the hospital with changes to their medication regimens, multiple tests still pending, and a need for follow up with their primary care physicians, writes a team of authors from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Yale University, and other research institutions.  Discharge summaries are intended to bridge that gap between the inpatient setting and the resumption of outpatient care, yet often fail in their task.
After examining 1501 discharge summaries for patients admitted to the hospital for acute heart failure-related issues, the research team found that 7.3% of discharge summaries with time stamps were prepared more than thirty days after the patient left the hospital.  Smaller hospitals were less likely to complete their paperwork on the day of discharge compared with larger teaching hospitals.  More than 250 of the initial sample did not include time or date stamps that would allow them to be included in the analysis.
Opioid Awareness Week Focuses on Population Health Management
Yale, Epic Partner to Boost Healthcare with Big Data Analytics
Humana: Change the Conversation on Chronic Disease Management
Why are hospitals data rich but lacking in data analytics?
EHR Natural Language Processing Errors Bring Patient Safety Concerns
RAND: Patient-Centered Medical Home May Cost $147K Per Year
Medication adherence study scrutinizes pharmacies, packaging
In healthcare analytics, real-time data tops the wish list
Will Healthcare Data Analytics Suffer If DeSalvo Leaves ONC?
Care Coordination, Quality Care Can Increase Patient Loyalty
MA Unveils Healthcare Big Data Analytics, EHR Innovation Project
How Useful Are Wearable Devices for Patients, Providers?
2014 Million Hearts Challenge urges hypertension control
All-cause mortality rates in MA drop 3% after healthcare reform
EHR Clinical Decision Support Produces Better Patient Care
ACOs Must Have Better Data for Population Health Management
Population Health Cuts Native American Kidney Disease by 54%
Will Facebook and Twitter unlock new clues to sleep disorders?
CMS: Big Data Access Vital for Precision Medicine, Drug Pricing
CDC: Improved care could prevent 258,000 annual deaths
AMGA: Data fragmentation is “inadequate” for accountable care
What Does “Flexible” ICD-10 Implementation Really Mean?
Payers Wary of Outsourcing Big Data Analytics, Health IT Tasks
Penn Med. Population Health Analytics Dashboard Wins ECRI Prize
Private Payers Driving Value-Based Payment, Accountable Care
EHR Socioeconomic Data a Must for Population Health Management
PCDC Celebrates Aiding Its 200th Patient-Centered Medical Home
NIH Calls for “All of Us” Population Health Research Proposals
Study: Fewer blood transfusions mean better patient outcomes
Online Population Health Data Dashboard Grows to Include 500 Cities
Overlap of business, clinical intelligence lets analytics shine
Earlier chemo for prostate cancer gives men an extra 14 months
Artificial Intelligence a “Low Priority” for Healthcare Orgs in 2018
Congress Urged to Incentivize Combating Antibiotic Resistance
Healthcare Big Data Analytics Aids Financial IT Benchmarking
CMS Hosts Help Session for Physician Quality Reporting System
EHR Analytics Advance Population Health Management of the Flu
Stage 3 MU Steadily Loses Favor as EHR Usability Concerns Rise
ONC: Just 28% of patients have online access to health data
Nurse Informaticists Have “Direct Positive Impact” on Patient Care
How Many Emergency Department Visits are Really Avoidable?
Despite EHR Patient Portals, Providers Still Charge for PHI
Chief Nurse Informaticists Tackle EHRs, Big Data Analytics
Can Cloud Big Data Analytics Fix Healthcare’s Insight Problem?
Twitter provides big data for adverse drug event identification
FDA Seeks Patient Engagement for Clinical Trials, Precision Medicine
How can predictive data analytics improve medication adherence?
HIMSS Recognizes EHR Products for Immunization Data Integration
Public Reporting Influences Perceptions of Hospital Quality
EHR Use, Population Health Lessons from a Davies Award Winner
Microsoft Takes on Blindness, Eye Care with AI, Machine Learning
Artificial Intelligence Helps with Costs, Clinical Care at HIMSS18
Cultivating a Big Data Mindset for Coders, Clinical Documentation
Analytics brings actionable data to Colorado Medicaid program
95% See Population Health as Critical, but Worry about Payment
Boosting Chronic Disease Management Through Pop Health Management
AHIMA: Learning health system combines informatics, innovation
FCC Plans to Map Broadband Access to Aid Chronic Disease Care
Who is Responsible for Ensuring Health Data Interoperability?
Machine Learning to Fuel “Collective Intelligence” of Human Dx Project
Did Truven rank Medicare upcoding hospital’s quality too highly?
CMS: Help us reform payments to better manage chronic disease
Healthcare Big Data, IoT, Cognitive Computing Markets Set to Grow
ONC: Public health reporting relies on EHR infrastructure
ONC Playbook Breaks Down Health IT, EHR Tasks and Buzzwords
CMS Proposes Coverage for Next-Gen Precision Medicine Test
Population health management lowers employer healthcare costs
“Basic Science” of Healthcare Big Data Analytics Still Needs Work
UCLA Research Center to Focus on Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Healthcare Big Data Analytics Skills Top C-Suite Wish List
Artificial Intelligence Tool Passes UK Medical Diagnostics Exam
Hospitals partner with long-term care to reduce readmissions
ONC Health IT Interoperability Roadmap Stresses Data Standards
Using Big Data Analytics, Systems Engineering to Tackle Sepsis
As Hospital EHR Adoption Rises, What’s Next for Health IT?
Health IT Helps CA Children’s Hospital Win HIMSS Davies Award
HIMSS Asks Congress for Population Health Management Support
UCSF Receives $85M NIH Grant for Precision Medicine Research
By 2025, Blockchain, IoT, Machine Learning Will Converge in Healthcare
Global analytics, research network to boost safety and quality
Home Interventions Boost Asthma Chronic Disease Management
Behavioral Health Homes Boost Patient Engagement, Self-Management
Analytics market forecast to reach $17.1 billion by 2016
Why are EHR Alerts, Clinical Decision Support So Ineffective?
93% of Clinical Trial Participants Comfortable with Data Sharing
CancerLinQ Data Lake Gathers Electronic Records of 1M Patients
ONC Offers $80K for Tools to Improve EHR Reporting for Patient Safety
HIMSS15 Leaders Stress Population Health Management, Engagement
Precision Medicine, Big Data Partnerships Will Enhance Treatment
Chronic Disease Management Costs 17 Times More than Average
EHR, Big Data Analytics Tech Support Key to Customer Loyalty
Hyperledger Brings Healthcare Blockchain Closer with Fabric 1.0
Harvard, MIT, Hopkins to share in $540M for cancer research
How Does the ONC Define HIE, Value-Based Care, Population Health?
Care Coordination, Quality Projects Win HHS Innovation Awards
HIM, Revenue Cycle Management Metrics to Watch before ICD-10
NIH Takes on Population Health Disparities with Social Epigenomics
Can Big Data Analytics Improve Medication Non-Adherence?
Three real use cases for healthcare analytics working today
Epic EHR, Big Data Tools Bring 2016 HIMSS Davies Award to Mercy
Even when created within a reasonable timeframe, patient discharge summaries were not always transmitted to a primary care physician to facilitate follow up care.  Only a third of hospitals, on average, transmitted discharge summaries to a specific physician.  Physician extenders were most likely to send summaries to a follow up physician, with two-thirds of staff members completing the task compared to just 23.5% of trainees and 52.9% of attendings.
Only 1.7% of discharge summaries included information about pending laboratory tests, the study found.  Just 11 documents included the phone number of the discharging physician to enable better coordination between care sites.  The average summary included 3.75 of the 7 standard care data elements recommended for a smooth transition.  Summaries completed on the day of discharge were more likely to include a higher number of important data elements than those written in subsequent days or weeks.
“The range in hospital performance suggests that attention to transitional care processes might help produce consistently higher quality summaries,” the study concludes.  “Patients with heart failure represent a cohort vulnerable to frequent hospital readmissions, and discharge documentation practices for this group have critical effect on transition of care and patient outcomes.”
The authors suggest that healthcare organizations stress the early completion of discharge documentation as a way to ensure that the maximum amount of useful information is documented.  An audit or feedback program may also help to ensure that providers are including enough pertinent information about the patient’s condition and follow up care to encourage more robust care coordination between settings with the aim of reducing readmissions and allowing patients to better recover from their hospitalization.
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementHealth Information Management


