$28M in AHA Grant Funding Will Accelerate Cardiovascular Research

June 15, 2018

By Jessica Kent
June 15, 2018 - The American Heart Association (AHA) has awarded six institutions more than $28 million to establish research centers that will foster advancements in the prevention and treatment of atrial fibrillation (AFib).
The awardees include Boston University, Cleveland Clinic, Northwestern University, Stanford University, the University of Utah, and Vanderbilt University. Together, these six institutions make up the AFib Strategically Focused Research Network.
“Establishing these centers with leading investigators from renowned institutions is an important step in discovering biological, genetic and behavioral connections affecting the occurrence and impact of AFib and stroke related to this common arrhythmia,” said AHA Chief Science Officer Rose Marie Robertson. 
Dig Deeper
How Team-Based Care Management Improves Cardiovascular Health
Collaboration, Big Data Help Phoenix Children’s Focus on Value-Based Care
ACC: Care Coordination Vital for Chronic Disease Management
“Bringing together the best science while empowering patients to be active participants in their own care should significantly improve the quality of life for those who suffer from AFib. Science saves lives, and we know how very personal this is to our donors and supporters.”
According to AHA, AFib is the most common heart defect in the US, with an estimated 6.1 million Americans living with the condition as of 2010. By 2030, that number is expected to rise to 12.1 million.
The Sarah Ross Soter Center for AFib at Cleveland Clinic will focus on questions in AFib care, seek new therapies, and test behavior change programs that have potential to prevent symptoms of AFib from worsening.
AHA also awarded two Decision-Making and Choices to Inform Dialogue and Empower AFib Patients (DECIDE) research grants.
The two DECIDE Centers, located at the University of Utah and Stanford University, will develop shared decision-making tools and compare their effect on AFib patients and clinicians.
The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI)-AHA DECIDE Center at the University of Utah will examine the effectiveness of approaches designed to increase patient engagement and activate individuals in their own care.
With a $2.75 million investment from PCORI, the PCORI-AHA DECIDE Center will evaluate different decision aids to see which most improves the quality of care for AFib patients.
The Joe and Linda Chlapaty DECIDE Center at Stanford University will develop an innovative shared decision-making pathway that includes a patient-designed interactive tool, clinician education, and patient coach training.
At Boston University, the AFib research center will examine AFib risk and stroke in patients, specifically focusing on African American individuals with AFib. This center will strive to enhance precision medicine by predicting high-risk individuals and offering insights that will lead to effective treatment, prevention and management strategies.
The research center at Northwestern University will study how AFib develops and how it causes stroke, and researchers at Vanderbilt University will test how inflammation may cause and worsen risk across patient populations.
The AFib Strategically Focused Research Network will provide the AHA with improved insight into the causes, biology and epidemiology of AFib. This enhanced understanding will boost health outcomes and advance the treatment of patients with AFib.
Tagged AHAChronic Disease ManagementChronic Disease PreventionMedical Research


