AAFP recreates center for EHR optimization, clinical analytics

July 18, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 18, 2014 - The American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) has announced the rebranding of its Center for Healthcare Technology, a program focused on helping providers make efficient, effective use of their electronic health records.  With an eye towards clinical analytics and data-driven healthcare, the newly named Alliance for eHealth innovation will encourage providers to adopt better workflows and leverage clinical data to close gaps in the continuum of care.
“The initial establishment of the Center signaled the importance of the need to move from paper-based to computerized information systems in the family physicians office,” said Douglas E. Henley, M.D., AAFP executive vice president. “We’ve seen real progress with adoption of EMR technology — in 2014, 80 percent of our members are using an EMR. Now it’s time to focus more heavily on optimal use of that technology.”
“This new name will reflect our mission to move beyond the EMR and towards the automation of care delivery,” added Steven Waldren, M.D., director of the AAFP’s Center for Health Information Technology, who will continue in his director role with the Alliance. “This new direction focuses more broadly on eHealth.”
According to an AAFP press release, the Alliance will focus on four key areas of EHR optimization:
Dig Deeper
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
VA, DOD, NCI Partner for Precision Medicine Tumor Screening
• Discovery: Identifying best practices among members who have found high job satisfaction and high care quality.
• Deployment: Sharing those best practices throughout AAFP membership and the primary care community.
• Development: Working with industry partners to fill gaps in current information technology products and developing new innovative offerings.
• Data: Provide analytics to demonstrate and improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of Family Medicine.
Tagged Care CoordinationClinical AnalyticsEHR Use


