Major payers, providers form accountable care organizations

September 23, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 23, 2014 - Accountable care organizations (ACOs) continue to crop up around the country as providers accelerate the shift from pay-for-performance to value-based reimbursements, adding to evidence that the pay-for-performance model may be a sustainable way to reduce costs, focus on population health management, and improve the quality of care.  Here are a few of the most recent batch of ACO partnerships between large payers and provider organizations.
Cigna and Virginia Quality Care Partners
Cigna and more than 1000 physicians are launching a collaborative care initiative on October 1 that aims to improve access to care for patients in central Virginia.  The programs focus on raising screening rates, increasing preventative care services, and easing the transition from the hospital back to the home.
“Backed by individual quality and performance metrics tracked by the network, VQCP physicians are developing an innovative care-delivery model that is physician directed,” said Glenn Giessel, MD, a pulmonologist and Chair of VQCP’s Board of Managers. “We focus on the whole patient, promoting preventive care and better management of chronic conditions as well as appropriate treatment settings and smoother transitions from the hospital to home and ambulatory care follow up.”
Dig Deeper
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
Dental Care is the Missing Piece of Population Health Management
Florida Blue and Baptist Health Care Corporation
Also starting on October 1, Florida Blue and Baptist Health Care will help provide more coordinated care to patients in Florida and Alabama.  The accountable care program will rely on a value-based payment model that will reward efficiency and high quality.
“We are pleased to launch an accountable care relationship with Baptist Health Care,” said Kirk Fischer, vice president of Delivery System for Florida Blue. “Both organizations realize the importance of honing their population health management capabilities for improved outcomes. This relationship will be highly beneficial to our members in northwest Florida.”
Baylor Scott & White Quality Alliance and Aetna
Aetna patients of more than 900 primary care providers, 27 hospitals, and 2,800 specialists in North Texas will receive more accountable care from Baylor Scott & White Quality Alliance with new options from their payer.  Providers will receive financial benefits from raising the percentage of members who receive preventative care screenings, improving the management of chronic diseases, and reducing preventable hospital readmissions.
“Aetna is pleased to work with Baylor Scott & White Quality Alliance to provide a simpler and more efficient health care experience for our members while helping employers to manage health care costs,” said Ralph Holmes, Aetna’s president for North Texas. “By working collaboratively with organizations such as Baylor Scott & White Quality Alliance, we are changing the health care system to focus on quality and affordability while ensuring that our members receive care that helps them live healthier, more productive lives.”
  Health Choice Utah Preferred Network and Humana 
Performance-based financial incentives will give Health Choice Utah Preferred Network providers the impetus to deliver high quality, coordinated care under new guidelines from Humana, Inc.  The agreement will focus on cost effectiveness as well as offer a broad range of population health management programs such as chronic disease management and wellness opportunities.
“Most traditional health care systems revolve around sick care and paying for services rather than paying for healthier patient outcomes,” said Oraida Roman, President of Senior Products for Humana’s Intermountain Region. “Humana is transitioning to a value-based model that aligns incentives to health systems, like Health Choice, for improving the health and well-being of the member.”
      Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsPopulation Health Management


