AHRQ, PCORI invest millions in patient safety, engagement

February 14, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 14, 2014 - Researchers studying population health management techniques and patient safety concerns are getting a lot of love this Valentine’s Day from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) and Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI).  A portion of the $4 million AHRQ will spend on health IT research this year will be dedicated to examining the patient safety impacts of EHRs, while PCORI has announced a $15.5 million investment in a new awards program designed to boost patient engagement.
In a special notice, the AHRQ announced that it is currently requesting grant applications for projects that help “promote post-deployment safety testing of EHRs for high prevalence, high impact EHR-related patient safety risks and focused research demonstration projects that provide evidence to inform the safe use of health IT.”
While EHRs bring clear benefits to the process of standardizing and tracking care, they also present serious risks when documentation integrity breaks down.  The Pennsylvania Patient Safety Authority released a report late last year detailing the perils of poor drug prescribing habits, dosing mistakes, gaps in the patient record, and uncoordinated transitions of care, which caused harm to several patients.
Meanwhile, PCORI is hoping to help patients take more responsibility for their healthcare, which may help reduce errors as patients become more aware of what physicians need to know and what patients need to supply.  The Eugene Washington PCORI Engagement Awards, named after the first chair of PCORI’s Board of Governors, intend to establish an infrastructure to increase patient-centered outcomes research and engage the community in the research and care delivery process.
Dig Deeper
Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
Research Collaboration to Use Big Data for Diabetes Prevention
Precision Medicine Aids 20% Drop in Pediatric Cancer Deaths
PCORI will award grants to research proposals that build knowledge about consumer habits, promote the engagement of patients and other stakeholders in patient-centered research, and support educational activities that disseminate information about PCORI results to the medical and patient communities.
“The inclusion of patient and stakeholder perspectives in health research is critical to producing information that is relevant, useful and trustworthy,” said PCORI Deputy Executive Director and Chief Officer for Engagement Anne C. Beal, MD, MPH. “The PCORI Engagement Awards program will enhance our primary research efforts by building a diverse community ready to participate in research and eager to help communicate its results.”
PCORI recently announced its “Pipeline to Proposal” grant winners, who will share in nearly half a million dollars to study public health issues like Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s and build support within local communities for patients and caregivers of those suffering from the conditions.  The Institute also allotted a whopping $93.5 million in funding for the development of a clinical research network that will speed up the pace of clinical trials and provide a pool of electronic information for clinical analytics works.
  Tagged Clinical AnalyticsEHR and Patient EngagementMedical ResearchPatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


