Most States Lack Transparent Physician Quality Reporting Data

December 19, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 19, 2014 - The majority of US states received a failing grade for patient access to complete, accurate, and transparent physician quality reporting data, found the Health Care Incentives Improvement Institute (HCI3).  Only ten states ranked higher than an “F” grade when their publicly available quality program data was judged on criteria including understandable navigation of patient-facing websites, usability of quality data to make healthcare decisions, and the scope of information available.  While CMS has been making a concerted effort to improve quality reporting data, HCI3 believes that the current landscape remains sub-par.
“This second annual State Report Card on Transparency of Physician Quality Information illustrates the divide that continues to separate states that take the protection and rights of consumers seriously, with those that seem to believe that market opacity is perfectly okay,” write the authors of the study.
“In states across the country, the buyers of health care – ordinary citizens – have no information on which to base their decision, and the failures of the market continue to impact them in the form of higher premiums and costs.”
As payers shift to higher deductible health insurance plans that require more out-of-pocket investment from patients, the availability of physician quality data is becoming increasingly important.
Dig Deeper
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
ECRI: “Most If Not All” Patient Identification Errors Preventable
Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
Patients are actively seeking information about their physicians, including consumer reviews on care quality, the patient experience, the physician’s competence, and the office environment.  Many patients are even willing to spend more to see an out-of-network physician if they have a good experience or if the physician’s skills match their needs better than a cheaper option.
For this reason, physicians concerned with growing their market share or stabilizing their finances should be just as invested as consumers in disseminating quality data and ensuring that the information is easily accessible and digestible.  Yet both consumer-focused websites and the five CMS Compare websites are falling short of providing enough information to help patients make the best decisions, according to a recent report by the Government Accountability Office.
“Until CMS establishes such procedures and performance metrics with respect to implementing their goals for promoting health care transparency,” the report said, “the Agency is likely to continue to have limited effectiveness in conveying relevant and understandable information on cost and quality to consumers.”
As a response to these concerns, CMS announced this week that it has updated certain data elements on its Compare websites.  Consumers will now have access to information on hospitals receiving payment adjustments under the Value-Based Purchasing Program in 2015, updated performance metrics for diabetes and cardiovascular care for certain practices and accountable care organizations, and measures related to hospital-acquired conditions (HACS) such as various types of infections and pressure ulcers.
“CMS is committed to transparency of data about quality and cost of care provided by physicians, hospitals and other health care professionals,” wrote CMS Deputy Administrator for Innovation and Quality and Chief Medical Officer Dr. Patrick Conway. “This transparency is critical to transforming the health care delivery system to achieve the three aims of better care for patients, better health for communities and spending dollars wisely.”
  Tagged Healthcare Business IntelligenceHospital QualityQuality Of Care


