Colorado Payers Build Online Care Coordination Portal

December 04, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
A centralized patient data portal will help Colorado providers with care coordination and population health management.
December 04, 2014 - A coalition of seven health plans in Colorado are creating an easier way for physicians to use healthcare data for care coordination by building an online portal that allows providers to access a single source of information for their patients.  The data aggregation portal will let providers sign on to one system that will allow them to view patient-level information across the care continuum, and will be available for use in the first quarter of 2015.
“This initiative represents a major step forward for both providers and payers in Colorado. For the first time, physicians will be able to access actionable, patient-specific data across multiple insurers and self-funding employers in a single analytic tool,” said Patrick Gordon, Associate Vice President at Rocky Mountain Health Plans, one of the participating organizations.  The other six members of the Colorado Comprehensive Primary Care (CO CPC) initiative working on the project are Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield, Cigna, Colorado Access, Colorado Choice Health Plans, Colorado Medicaid, and UnitedHealthcare.
“This represents an innovative solution to a longstanding problem. Too often, it’s either feast or famine; providers either lack sufficient information or they are bombarded with too much. Now, we can provide them the right amount of information at the right time,” added Kelly Henry, Network Director of Payment Innovation Programs at Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield.
Developers hope that the tool will foster a more centralized method of care coordination and aid burgeoning population health management programs across the state, including in Colorado’s rural areas.  The state’s Medicaid organization, the Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, views the new portal as a piece of the region’s ongoing strategy to improve care coordination, lower costs, and raise quality.
Dig Deeper
Brown Gets $1.1M to Study Medicare Post-Discharge Care Quality
Penn State, Highmark Health to Spend $1B on Population Health
Payers, Providers Make Dental Care a Population Health Issue
“We’re building on the CO CPC opportunity, but it’s just a launching pad. We believe we’ve created a program that is the beginning of a long collaboration to help improve Colorado’s health care system,” said Dr. Judy Zerzan, Chief Medical Officer and Deputy Director of the Medicaid program.
Colorado has long been a leader in leveraging healthcare data for analytics, health information exchange, and population health management with several successful programs.  The Colorado Beacon Consortium is one of seventeen organizations participating in the ONC’s Beacon Community Program, and was the subject of a best practices case study in 2013.  The Colorado Regional Health Information Organization (CORHIO), is also one of the nation’s most mature state-level HIEs, covering at least 65% of Colorado patients.
“Colorado continues to play a leading role in developing innovative solutions that build deeper relationships with care providers and help increase quality of care and reduce costs for patients,” said Beth Soberg, president and CEO of UnitedHealthcare of Colorado. “This new initiative will simplify care providers’ ability to access important patient information to help better manage population health.”
Tagged Care CoordinationPatient DataPopulation Health Management


