MGH, MIT partner on clinical analytics, diagnostics research

October 16, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 16, 2014 - Massachusetts General Hospital (MHG) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) will be working together to provide up to $3 million in grant money intended to support and accelerate clinical analytics and medical diagnostics projects.  With the aim of addressing critical challenges to clinical medicine, the two-year partnership will focus on projects that include the development of nanosensors and non-invasive monitoring.
“MIT and MGH have uniquely synergistic and complementary strengths,” says Arup Chakraborty, PhD, director of the MIT Institute for Medical Engineering and Science. “I believe that developing the cost-effective diagnostic tools, therapies and vaccines needed to overcome some of the daunting challenges facing human health today can be achieved by bringing approaches from engineering and basic science together with clinical medicine and that a strategic partnership between our institutions could achieve much more towards advancing human health.”
“The continuing crisis in funding for the National Institutes of Health has shifted the NIH focus from single-investigator grants to collaborative grants, encouraging institutions to look outside their walls,” added Harry Orf, PhD, MGH senior vice president for Research. “By supporting the early stages of these collaborating teams, we expect to strengthen their ability to apply for continued funding from the NIH or other agencies.”
The three major challenges of interest to the grant-makers include improving the diagnosis of disease, developing new methods of preventing and treating infectious and autoimmune conditions, and developing more accurate ways to diagnose and care for major neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases.
Dig Deeper
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
All of Us Precision Medicine Network Expands with $13.8M in Grants
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Six grants addressing the first pillar have already been awarded.  Researchers from the two institutions will receive funding for their research into areas including wireless devices that monitor breathing without having to touch the patient, a noninvasive device that measures blood volume using nuclear magnetic resonance, an analysis of changes in a patient’s lab results over time harnessing the power of machine learning, and the development of a data archive that includes EHR and bedside monitoring data to predict the transition from sepsis to septic shock.
“This strategic alliance amplifies the already substantial capabilities of MIT and MGH,” said Ian A. Waitz, PhD. dean of the School of Engineering at MIT. “It builds on our launch of the Institute for Medical Engineering and Science by formalizing a critical element in our effort to advance human health – a direct and sustained connection with a world-class teaching hospital.”

Tagged Applied AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient Data


