Achieving Broad Interoperability, HIE by Building Community

December 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 03, 2014 - Interoperability is often described as the ability of disparate EHR systems to directly exchange data in a standardized way, but truly effective interoperable health information exchange may require a third party to facilitate the transaction while EHR developers continue to rely on proprietary technologies.  Local, private, and state-level health information exchange (HIE) organizations have filled that need for years as the healthcare industry slowly tries to build connections with business partners, but even these entities sometimes struggle to help everyone start speaking the same language due to financial shortfalls, cagy hospital participants, or technical difficulties.
At Surescripts, which built its infrastructure and reputation as an e-prescribing network, casting the net towards a wider array of HIE services seems like a natural progression, says Jeff Miller, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Clinical Network Services.  With more health systems signing up for interoperability services every day, Surescripts occupies a unique place in the HIE ecosystem: one that focuses not only on building communities with its own technologies, but also on bringing other interoperability stakeholders, hospitals, physician providers, and other  organizations together in innovative ways.
“We are an organization that has developed the technical capacity and business relationships to work with the broad array of health IT vendors, EMR vendors and other health IT vendors that are out there and need to be part of the answer to the problem,” Miller told HealthITAnalytics.  “Our approach is very much about building collaboration among those vendors versus building what we would call ‘sidecar solutions’ as we go forward.”
“Part of what we’re doing is working with directly connecting health systems to our network.  In other cases, where vendors have created their own communities, we’re connecting those communities to our community,” he explained.  “And in cases where there may be public networks already created, like state HIEs or regional health information organizations (RHIOs), we connect to those organizations as well.  They are all focused on how to get the broadest visibility and the broadest level of exchange, even though some of these organizations use models that don’t rely on our core technology.”
One of the hospitals that recently added Surescripts to its interoperability framework is St. Joseph’s Hospital Health Center in Syracuse, New York. “There are a number of independent community-based providers that choose to practice at St. Joseph’s, and our objective was to make our organization and our network of services the easiest system to practice in,” said Charles Fennell, Vice President for Information Management and Chief Information Officer.  “With the understanding that we are going to live in a heterogeneous environment, we needed an interoperability strategy to work with community-based providers.  We recognized the opportunity to adopt and to promote the Direct protocol to distribute results in a way that fits into the physician’s workflow.”
READ MORE: Three HIEs Connect to Create “Patient-Centered Data Home”
“Creating the need and the awareness and the strategy is an important element, and then healthcare providers need to choose the means by which they accomplish that, whether they use their local RHIO or health information exchange, or whether they use a third party like Surescripts.  Different communities may have different answers to that question,” he said.
The 431-bed non-profit facility serves sixteen counties in upstate New York.  “Some of the new communications that we’ve been able to take advantage of with the Direct protocols are really around referral patterns,” Fennell explained.  “It’s important to be able to support referrals from primary care to specialists, and those communications from those specialists and sub-specialists back to the primary care by using Direct.  It’s important to get those messages integrated into the workflow.”
“When we talk about interoperability and integration with community-based providers, what we’re talking about now is really supporting safe transitions in care,” he continued.  “So if I make a referral, how do I do that efficiently?  How do I provide all the information that’s needed for that subsequent visit, and the information back through that referral?  If a patient is discharged from the hospital or from the emergency department, and that information needs to be available to the primary care physician or to that follow-up visit.  How do I make sure that happens appropriately?  We’re really focused on supporting those safe transitions right now.”
New York State has recently made several strides towards connecting various communities, many of which are rural, through regional HIE organizations.  Southern Tier Healthlink (STHL) and Taconic Health Information Network and Community (THINC) recently announced their merger into HealthlinkNY, which will cover eleven counties in the Hudson Valley and Catskill Mountain areas.  The new organization joins a number of HIEs and RHIOs promoting and enabling information exchange throughout the state, including the Albany-area Health Information Exchange of New York (HIXNY), the New York eHealth Collaborative, and the Statewide Health Information Network of New York (SHIN-NY).
Miller once worked as the CEO of the North Carolina Health Information Exchange (NC HIE), but doesn’t necessarily view his current position as a leap to a direct competitor with state-level organizations.  “Of course we do compete with them in some cases, because we may have a large health system in their state on our network, but we absolutely look to connect to them,” Miller said.  “There are 23 different state HIEs and regional health information exchanges that we have connections with today. Their users can send information and receive information to and from our users.  In some cases, those organizations actually look to us and have asked us to provide services, and think that we may offer a better model than other solutions both financially and operationally.”
READ MORE: Healthcare CIOs Turning to Data Analytics for Business Intelligence
State HIEs have been strong proponents of interoperability and have achieved significant milestones across the country, but a number of them have failed to successfully launch and sustain themselves in a constantly changing landscape.  Some HIEs, like Maine’s HealthInfoNet, have found success by following a path similar to Surescripts and diversifying their offerings.  By promoting clinical analytics, data warehousing, and population health management as a service, state HIEs can sustain themselves financially and join more commercially-focused organizations like Surescripts in a space that may always have room for more than one interoperability option.
“I don’t think there’s ever going to be a singular nationwide system that does everything for everybody,” Miller says. “You can look at the telecommunications industry as an example of that.  We don’t have a singular communications network for the country.  We have some people that offer a very broad set of services – voice, data, video – and they offer it nationally. And you have some people who look and offer regional service and maybe only focus on a smaller set.  Some people offer wired and wireless; some are only wireless.  So I think the market will settle out and will offer services where they can generate value for their constituents.”
“We shouldn’t try to be too prescriptive as an industry about this, because the last thing we want to is to exchange information just to exchange information,” he said.  “The whole goal behind health information exchange is to ensure that we can appropriately impact the quality and effectiveness of the healthcare system, not just to ensure everybody can exchange all the information with everybody.  Because I’m not sure that is cost effective or even necessary.”
While the ONC’s ten-year interoperability roadmap puts a strong emphasis on health information exchange and data-driven care coordination as tools for achieving higher quality patient care, the “learning health system” envisioned by the ONC might want to take a few lessons from the various successes and failures of other programs such as meaningful use, which has generated frustration, confusion, and backlash with its stringent guidelines and increasingly high expectations for meeting thresholds regardless of the impact on workflow and patient experience.  As Stage 2 of the EHR Incentive Programs moves into full swing and Stage 3 approaches on the horizon, some stakeholders are questioning whether the program is driving true improvement or just making providers jump through hoops and check boxes.
“There have been a lot of people writing about the ten-year strategy and if it’s the right thing to do,” Miller commented.  “I think one of the things we need to learn from others who have been here before us, like the finance industry and the factory industry, is that these changes occur incrementally.  This is not going to be a ‘turn it on one day and it works’ type of thing. The value that may be extracted or achieved may not be apparent today.  You have to view this as a journey, not a singular destination that you can think about ten years in the future.”
READ MORE: Are Health Data Interoperability Standards the Same in Theory as Practice?
“I don’t think we view meaningful use as the driver of strategy,” added Fennell.  “We think that the objectives of meaningful use are the objectives we’re looking to accomplish regardless of the incentive dollars.  I don’t want to say we’re doing computerized physician order entry because of meaningful use.  We’re doing CPOE because it’s the right thing to do.”
“What we like about some of the meaningful use objectives is that they are driving industry interoperability, and driving some of these standards,” Fennell said.  “Over time, I think they will enhance those standards, which is what the healthcare industry was lacking a number of years ago.  We didn’t have that really that organized effort around developing interoperability standards and that semantic interoperability.  So that’s really what we’re looking to get out of meaningful use.  It’s being able to take advantage of some of these standards and protocols that are being adopted by all providers and all vendors providing systems to those providers.”
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR InteroperabilityHealth Information ExchangeHealthcare Data Strategy


