Care coordination bill would aid chronic disease management

February 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 03, 2014 - A new bill simultaneously introduced into the House and the Senate is taking aim at Medicare patients living with multiple chronic diseases.  In an effort to save money for the healthcare system and provide higher quality care for the sickest patients, a bi-partisan group of lawmakers have volunteered the Better Care, Lower Cost Act of 2014 as a solution to the industry’s woes.  The bill introduces the Better Care Plan and Better Care Practice (BCP) system, which will provide performance-based payments for providers and payers who focus on chronic disease management.
“Medicare is now dominated by cancer, diabetes, heart disease, and other chronic conditions,” Senator Ron Wyden (D-OR) said. Sixty-eight percent of Medicare beneficiaries suffer from multiple chronic conditions, and these patients make up 93% of all Medicare spending.  Nearly all of high-cost hospital readmissions involve this patient population. Better care coordination may lower these costs and free up resources to address other health needs, too.
“Medicare reform must be built around offering better quality, more affordable care for these seniors,” he continued.  “Fortunately, there are pioneering practices and plans that are paving the way. The point of our bipartisan legislation is to break government’s shackles on innovation so that these providers are the norm rather than the exception.”
“I believe that the best and most innovative solutions come from the private sector and people on the ground, and my hope is that the Better Care, Lower Cost Act will unleash the creativity of the medical community to develop ways to provide better care at a lower cost,” said Senator Johnny Isakson (R-GA).  “I’m proud to join Senator Wyden in introducing this legislation, which addresses our health care system’s challenge of managing chronic medical conditions by allowing patients to voluntarily enroll in a program that incentivizes health care providers to invest in prevention and keeping patients healthy.”
Dig Deeper
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
The lawmakers hope to expand the penetration of the integrated care delivery model and help medical schools train their students in team-based care and geriatrics as the population rapidly ages.  Providers would also be encouraged to help rural populations connect to their clinicians through the expansion of telemedicine programs.  For their efforts, BCP providers would receive risk-adjusted capitated payments, calculated according to a newly revamped fee schedule, to reward better outcomes.
“We will never make Medicare more affordable for seniors, the disabled and taxpayers until we tackle the costs of chronic illnesses,” stated Joel White, President of the Council for Affordable Health Coverage. “Medicare is one of the last federal programs to benefit from modern health management tools and program-wide care coordination.  We are particularly excited that the bill may create new incentives to address poor medication adherence, a problem that impacts millions of Americans through chronic disease progression at a cost of almost $300 billion annually.”
Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


