Clinical analytics reigns at NY Digital Health Accelerator

July 25, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 25, 2014 - The New York Digital Health Accelerator is shining a bright spotlight on clinical analytics with its latest group of seven startups selected for the four-month business boot camp.  With $100,000 each and access to mentoring from senior health system executives, the lucky companies hope to bring predictive analytics, patient engagement, mHealth technologies, and hospital quality applications to consumers, following in the footsteps of the first class of graduates who raised $21 million between them.
“We have selected seven early- and growth-stage digital health companies that will be put on a fast track for building a successful business providing technology solutions to the healthcare industry that will ultimately reduce health costs and improve patient outcomes,” said Maria Gotsch, president and CEO of the Partnership Fund for New York City. “The 2014 class was selected through a competitive process from a pool of over one hundred applicants by the senior technology and innovation executives of the state’s twenty-three leading healthcare systems.”
The seven projects include the following:
Using predictive analytics based on past behaviors, AllazoHealth tackles medication adherence by flagging patients at risk of non-compliance and helping to influence positive behaviors.  The stand-alone analytics solution is designed to integrate with larger population health management programs, increasing adherence and reducing costs for the healthcare organization.
Dig Deeper
How Big Data Velocity Informs Population Health, Patient Safety
Clinical Analytics Aid Payers, Providers with Value-Based Care
Business Intelligence Tools Bring Insights to Organ Donation Network
Clinigence, a clinical business intelligence technology, incorporates clinical analytics, semantic data aggregation, and predictive modeling to identify care gaps and help providers improve outcomes in conjunction with the shift to value-based care models.
With vendor-agnostic technology, iQuartic provides real-time data EHR data processing for quality benchmarking, risk stratification, and disease management.  The company also offers accountable care organization (ACO) analytics and EHR reporting that can assess the status of a provider’s meaningful use efforts.
Covertix offers data security aimed at protecting cloud and mobile transactions independent of device, network, application, or data types.  Its suite of products allows users to control access to files, including images, videos, and PDFs.
Noom is a nutrition app aimed to engage patients in health behaviors while tracking their weight and exercise levels through mobile devices.  Patients can create personalized plans, log caloric intake, track activity, and receive reminders and notifications.
With its hospital rating site, Quality Reviews hopes to bring critical information to patients seeking services at local facilities by providing real-time quality analytics based on patient satisfaction surveys.  At the same time, participating hospitals have access to immediate quality metrics and patient feedback in order to address service issues.
Sense Health fosters patient engagement between healthcare providers and higher risk Medicaid patients through mHealth.  Providers can send pre-scripted health reminders or interactive text messages, allowing organizations to keep in touch with even the most hard-to-reach patients for better population health management.
  Tagged Clinical AnalyticsEHR and Patient EngagementPopulation Health Management


