AMA, Coalition Continue Tussle over ICD-10 Implementation

March 09, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 09, 2015 - The tug-of-war between ICD-10 implementation advocates and their stalwart foes is still raging as new data points give fodder to both sides about the industry’s readiness – or lack thereof – to bring the advanced code set into play on October 1, 2015.
While the AMA has gathered the signatures of 99 other professional groups and societies to a letter demanding CMS bulk up its contingency planning, the Coalition for ICD-10 continues to urge healthcare providers to follow existing ICD-10 implementation plans without veering into a two-tiered system of allowing dual coding for some smaller providers.
Last month, CMS released data about its inaugural end-to-end testing week, which concluded at the beginning of February and hailed the event as largely successful.  An 81 percent acceptance rate seemed to indicate that the majority of participating providers had a good grasp on the way ICD-10 claims should be coded and submitted.  CMS specifically noted that only 6 percent of the 15,000 claims submitted to Medicare’s systems were rejected solely due to an ICD-9 or ICD-10 diagnosis or procedure coding error.  The rest were due to administrative data mistakes that could be made under either code set.
But the American Medical Association, among ICD-10’s most persistent detractors, believes those numbers represent a serious flaw in the nation’s spotty and disorganized ICD-10 implementation process.  In a letter to Congress, the groups ask for more detailed data from the end-to-end testing opportunity, including information about the specific problems that led to rejections.
“The likelihood that Medicare will reject nearly one in five of the millions of claims that go through our complex health care system each day represents an intolerable and unnecessary disruption to physician practices,” said AMA President Robert M. Wah, MD in a statement accompanying the letter. “Robust contingency plans must be ready on day one of the ICD-10 switchover to save precious health care dollars and reduce unnecessary administrative tasks that take valuable time and resources away from patient care.”
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
The AMA has a point.  CMS has been focused on preparing providers for the big switch, but advice and direction on the process of contingency planning has been conspicuously absent from preparation materials and discussions.  And as Dr. Michael C. Burgess (R-TX) pointed out during a February hearing on the new code set, CMS has a less-than-stellar reputation when it comes to pulling back the curtain on massive technical projects.
“All roads eventually lead to CMS,” said Burgess.  “And if you will pardon me, that does appear to be a weak link in the chain.  From Healthcare.gov to the Sunshine Act reporting website…when CMS flips the switch, something breaks.  Any time they flip a switch that involves the processing of data, their systems fail.”
The AMA and its partners agree.  “We are concerned the administration is underestimating the impact the transition to ICD-10 will have on the regulatory tsunami that is already burdening physicians and threatening access to quality care,” Wah added. “Although we appreciate the training, educational tools and other efforts by CMS to prepare physicians for the ICD-10 transition, it is clear that more information is needed about how the shift will impact quality reporting so physicians can avoid penalties.”
The AMA previously floated the idea of implementing ICD-10 with a two-year grace period that would prevent payers from penalizing providers if they made coding or claims errors, but that proposal seems to have fallen flat.  More recently, some stakeholders have raised the notion of dividing ICD-10 implementation into a two-track system by allowing providers who can’t be ready by October 1 to submit claims in either ICD-9 or ICD-10 during an unspecified transitional period.
ICD-10 implementation proponents have quickly decried this scheme, which may produce more problems than it solves.  ICD-10 is primarily an information governance initiative, intended to provide clean, robust, detailed, and granular data that can be used to boost the adoption and usefulness of clinical analytics while giving researchers more meaty data to work with.  Mixing ICD-9 and ICD-10 would defeat the purpose, says the Coalition for ICD-10, and could be even more costly, confusing, and damaging than the endless delays that have kept the United States out of the modern world of healthcare data analytics.
READ MORE: Mismatched Symptoms Call EHR Data Integrity into Question
“From an informatics perspective, a ‘dual-coding’ option has the potential to introduce inconsistencies into the patient record (which code is the correct one?), complicates how decision support systems work, and could pose a patient safety risk in both the exchange of the information and its use in decision support systems,” said Doug Fridsma MD, PhD, FACP, FACMI, President and CEO of the American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA).
Allowing systems to accept and transmit ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes could also be untenable for EHRs and practice management technologies designed for a hard cut-over from one code set to the next.  “CMS and many commercial health plans are unable to process claims for both ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes submitted for the same dates of service, so a ‘transition period’ – in which providers could submit claims using either ICD-9 or ICD-10 ­­– is not possible,” CMS has previously mentioned.
It may be unclear how healthcare providers would benefit from using dual coding for anything but practice in the run-up to October 1, 2015, but it’s much easier to see how the need for adequate contingency planning on the part of CMS, private payers, and especially healthcare providers, is a critical piece of ICD-10 preparation.
Providers should be taking steps to reduce their financial risk by providing sufficient opportunities for coders to practice their ICD-10 skills, participate in as many testing opportunities as possible, make arrangements for covering critical cash flow needs in case of disruption, and making sure that physician clinical documentation is of high enough quality and integrity to support the most detailed and accurate ICD-10 codes.
  Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


