NIH Unveils Precision Medicine, Genomics, Big Data Analytics Plan

September 21, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 21, 2015 - The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has published a detailed framework outlining its vision for the development of its Precision Medicine Initiative, a wide-ranging research program that hopes to integrate healthcare big data analytics, advances in genomics, and targeted therapies into real-world clinical applications. 
Announced in President Obama’s 2015 State of the Union Address, the Precision Medicine Initiative intends to create a databank of more than one million patient genomes as researchers delve into the genetic roots of the world’s most intractable diseases.
“We have an incredible opportunity to advance research and make new medical breakthroughs through precision medicine, which tailors disease prevention and treatment to individuals based on genetics, environment and lifestyle,” said Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell in a press release announcing the report. 
“Many factors have converged to make now the right time to begin this ambitious project,” added Dr. Francis S. Collins, MD, PhD, Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The NIH, along with the FDA, will be taking a leading role in coordinating national research efforts aimed at identifying the underlying causes of many cancers and developing tailored therapies to address an individual patient’s likely response to specific treatments.
To establish a large enough patient cohort to provide the foundation for precision medicine, the NIH and its partners hope to enroll at least one million patients who will agree to let their genetic profiles be used for cancer research, as well as explorations into the causes and treatments for diabetes, Alzheimer’s disease, obesity, mental disorders, and heart disease, Collins said in an accompanying blog post.
READ MORE: NIH Awards $9M for Open Source, Cloud-Based Big Data Commons
“The Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort Program will be a broad, powerful resource for researchers working on a variety of important health questions,” he said.  “Equally important, the Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort Program will change the way we do research. Participants will be partners in research, not subjects, and will have access to a wide range of study results. What we’re doing with the Precision Medicine Initiative cohort is intersecting in a synergistic way with other fundamental changes in medicine and research to empower Americans to live healthier lives.”
The framework, developed by the PMI Working Group, proposes two ways of recruiting a sufficient number of patient participants: collecting specimens and consent from patients directly, and leveraging the influence of healthcare providers to expand contribution efforts and ensure a higher level of patient participant diversity.
Patients would be asked to consent to ongoing participation in the project, which will be designed around an interactive and proactive participation model.  “The Working Group recognizes that building and maintaining trust is a critical component to a successful, ongoing, collaborative relationship with participants and the public at large, and recommends the development of a set of guiding principles that apply to all PMI cohort stakeholders,” the report says.
Participants will receive feedback and data from study results, as well as opportunities to join complementary studies on certain diseases, the Workgroup adds.  They should have access to the data they contribute, yet this information should also be appropriately and securely anonymized for use by researchers.
In order to allow for streamlined data collection and meaningful big data analytics, the report notes that the Precision Medicine Initiative must embrace recognized data standards and a high level of data integrity from its beginning. 
READ MORE: 70% of Orgs Planning Precision Medicine Will Deploy Within 2 Years
The project will develop a common data model for use across all its databases and participating healthcare organizations while keeping options open for leveraging emerging standards for systems that may not have widely-accepted parameters just yet.  Many biometric sensor technologies and Internet of Things devices are in their early stages of development, and industry-wide standards are still in their infancy.
Special attention must also be paid to the overarching governance structure for the broad and diverse initiative, which “must combine effective and timely decision making with opportunities for consultation and deliberation,” the report states. 
“The Working Group recommends that the PMI-CP be led by a director with the institutional authority, professional expertise, and structural support to provide strong, credible, and effective leadership,” while taking a “nimble and innovative” approach to solving precision medicine’s emerging challenges.  An independent oversight committee should be established to ensure that stakeholders are acting appropriately and safeguarding the sensitive patient information in their care.
“The Working Group is convinced that the time is right to mount this ambitious project to transform the understanding of factors contributing to individual health and disease, with conviction that success in this effort will advance the health of the United States,” the report added.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsMedical ResearchPrecision Medicine


