HHS Offers $70M in Grants to Prevent Opioid Abuse, Overdoses

June 07, 2017

By Thomas Beaton
June 07, 2017 - HHS has announced over $70 million in grant funding to help communities and providers across the care continuum reduce the incidence of opioid abuse and overdoses.
The grants, authorized by the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act (CARA), are divided into three categories to address public access to treatment and preventative care for opioid abuse.
Upwards of $41.1 million will be awarded to 30 grantees to provide training and resources to first responders in administering FDA approved products and treatment for known opioid overdoses. This funding amount lasts over a four-year period.
Dig Deeper
Addressing Opioid Abuse with Analytics, Population Health Strategies
HHS Distributes $458M in 21st Century Cures Opioid Abuse Grants
ACP: Use Population Health to Combat Opioids, Substance Abuse
$28.8 million will be awarded to five grantees to increase access to medication assisted-treatment for opioid abuse. A single grantee will receive $1 million over a five-year duration to expand the amount of overdose reversal medications in hospitals as well as similar healthcare settings.
“We are committed to bringing everything the federal government has to bear on this health crisis,” said HHS Secretary Tom Price. “Building partnerships and providing resources to state and local governments as well as non-government organizations are absolutely critical to this effort. The purpose of these grants is to empower the heroes in this fight—the men and women on the forefront of supporting prevention, treatment, and recovery initiatives in their communities.”
The funding follows a separate award from HHS of $485 million so states can combat opioid abuse. These new grants are a continuation of the federal government’s commitment to addressing the nationwide opioid health crisis.
Additionally, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) opened a separate funding amount of $5.9 million with a family and community emphasis on opioid treatment.
SAMHSA funding consists of two major grants. The State Pilot Grant Program for Treatment for Pregnant and Postpartum Women offers up to $3.3 million to support a range of family-based services for pregnant and postpartum women with substance use disorder. The Building Communities of Recovery grant awards $2.6 million to mobilize resources at a larger community level to increase long-term recovery support from substance abuse and addiction.
“The grants we announce today clearly demonstrate our efforts to meet the opioid crisis with every tool at our disposal,” said Kana Enomoto, the Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
“The evidence-based training, medication, and behavioral therapies provided here will save lives and help people with addictions start a path toward reaching their potential,” she said.
Tagged Care CoordinationHHSPopulation HealthPublic Health


