NIH Grants to Aid Biomedical Research Opportunities for Students

October 28, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Academic institutions will use NIH funding to mentor a new generation of biomedical researchers.
October 28, 2014 - The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has issued a series of large grants to a handful of academic institutions in order to expand biomedical research career opportunities for students.  As the rapid growth of healthcare analytics and informatics increasingly demand highly-trained data scientists and other innovative research professionals, the grants hope to recruit more budding researchers to the booming field of medical research and development.
“The biomedical research enterprise must engage all sectors of the population in order to solve the most complex biological problems and discover innovative new ways to improve human health,” said NIH Director Dr. Francis S. Collins. “While past efforts to diversify our workforce have had significant impact on individuals, we have not made substantial progress in expanding diversity on a larger scale. This program will test new models of training and mentoring so that we can ultimately attract the best minds from all groups to biomedical research.”
Recipients of the grants will form a national consortium to evaluate and develop more innovative approaches to stocking the healthcare industry with highly-qualified researchers, and will help to guide a diverse population of undergraduate students, new graduates, and PhD candidates through the often daunting process of securing positions in the academic world.
California State University Northridge (CSUN) received $22 million to build new programs that attract students from traditionally underserved communities and diverse ethnic backgrounds to the medical research field.
Dig Deeper
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
University of California Forms Big Data, Precision Medicine Network
“Until we start addressing why health disparities really exist in an honest or direct way, we aren’t going to make any difference in them,” psychology professor Carrie Saetermoe said. “Many of our students come from communities where those disparities exist. They understand in a more personal way what is happening. When you take what we’re teaching them in the classroom and get them to think about social problems and health problems from their perspectives, they can come up with viable solutions. At the same time, we are developing passionate individuals who are inspired to go on to become biomedical researchers because they know firsthand, from their work as undergraduate and graduate students, that they can make a difference.”
CSUN plans to establish a new Health and Health Disparities Research Center that will foster the programs created by the grant and serve as a resource for students interested in pursuing careers in the biomedical field.  Faculty members have already been lining up to bid for mentorship positions at the new center, university officials said, and are eager to help the institution provide competitive opportunities for students.
The University of Texas at El Paso received a similar amount, which it plans to use for scholarships.  The grant will fund programs aimed at high school seniors interested in science and engineering roles.  “This major investment by the National Institutes of Health reflects its confidence in the University of Texas at El Paso to inspire, train and support historically underserved and underrepresented scientists and engineers,” UTEP president Diana Natalicio said in a statement.
“Our program will train students who will eventually become research scholars,” added Lourdes Echegoyen, UTEP’s director of Undergraduate Research Initiatives. “Beginning the summer before their freshman year, students will start developing a professional identity and begin to think of themselves as research scientists and engineers.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsMedical Research


