EHR Use, Big Data Analytics Help Hospitals Earn Top EMRAM Marks

December 29, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 29, 2015 - Advanced use of electronic health records to improve patient safety, care coordination, HIE, and provider productivity is the hallmark of the upper echelons of the HIMSS EMR Adoption Model (EMRAM) score, and a number of hospitals have proved their mettle over the past few months by achieving Stage 6 and Stage 7 recognition.
Using carefully tailored workflows and sophisticated technologies, including clinical decision support and chronic disease management tools backed by big data analytics capabilities, several healthcare organizations around the nation have garnered recognition from HIMSS Analytics for their patient care prowess.
Among the recent honorees is Children’s Hospital Los Angeles (CHLA), which announced its Stage 6 achievement earlier this month.  Care coordination and patient safety were top concerns for the pediatric care center, which focused on improving its clinical documentation procedures to ensure that all providers in a patient’s care team are up to date on any changes.
Employing technologies such as automated lab orders and medication management tools, CHLA can actively monitor changes in a patient’s clinical notes and alert the right provider when new treatment steps are necessary.  If a patient receives a new asthma diagnosis, the press release says, her provider is notified that she will need an asthma treatment plan.
Dig Deeper
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
AMA Launches Integrated Healthcare Big Data Analytics Platform
“Our patients are safer as a result of Children’s Hospital Los Angeles’ commitment to technology,” says CHLA Vice President and Chief Information Officer T.J. Malseed. “This distinction by HIMSS attests to 11 years of technological advances CHLA has made and continues to make to protect and improve the health of our infants, children and teens.”
Yale-New Haven Hospital (YNHH) in New Jersey has taken EHR adoption one step further, and snagged the prestigious Stage 7 designation, joining just 3.7 percent of hospitals nationwide with that distinction.
“We are honored to receive this recognition,” said Thomas Balcezak, MD, Chief Medical Officer Yale-New Haven Hospital. “It shows our commitment to using technology in every aspect of our operations from bedside care to business intelligence. Fully adopting the EHR, helps us to provide highly reliable, safer, better care to patients every day.”
After an on-site visit to confirm YNHH’s achievements, John H. Daniels, CNM, FACHE, FHIMSS, CPHIMS, Global Vice President of the HIMSS Analytics Healthcare Advisory Services Group, had nothing but praise for the healthcare system’s efforts.
“They are leveraging their EHR technology in very innovative ways,” he said. “They are saving time and improving the patient experience through radiology protocolling using the EHR; their eICU has proven its value particularly when caring for patients in isolation; research recruitment is integrated in the patient portal; and they have proven the value of clinical decision support evidenced by their smoking cessation protocol compliance project. Stage 7 designation is well deserved!”
The state of Indiana can also boast a trio of new Stage 7 hospitals, now that Community Healthcare System’s three locations have earned the ranking.  Community Hospital in Munster, St. Catherine Hospital in East Chicago and St. Mary Medical Center in Hobart are not-for-profit facilities serving Northwest Indiana, and the health system includes a number of outpatient care centers, physician practices, behavioral and occupational health providers, home care, and cancer research and support centers.
“The level of strategic alignment at the Community Healthcare System between its IT strategy and its overall vision is quite remarkable,” said Daniels. “They are investing in advanced analytics capabilities and have effectively baked those capabilities into their clinical and business decision making processes, and they are achieving some impressive results.”
Big data is at the heart of Community Healthcare System’s ongoing improvement strategies, added President and CEO John Gorski.  “Through the process of integrating an electronic medical record system and leveraging other advances in information technology, Community Healthcare System has become a much more data-driven organization,” he said.
“Most importantly, we are using these new technologies to better engage our patients and the medical community in understanding how best to bring about improvements in healthcare.  The achievement of HIMSS Level 7 builds upon a long history of our hospitals using technology to improve the quality, safety and efficiency of care.”
These EMRAM leaders will be officially acknowledged for their achievements at the 2016 HIMSS Conference and Exhibition held in Las Vegas at the end of February.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsEHR UseQuality Of Care


