Quality, patient safety in the ED nearly flunk ACEP report card

January 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 17, 2014 - Access to safe and high quality emergency care for American patients is in need of an after-school tutorial.  The American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) has issued its 2014 state-by-state report card, giving the nation as a whole a D+ for metrics such as public health and injury prevention, disaster preparedness, access to care, and patient safety.  Thirteen states received failing grades for disaster preparation, including some states susceptible to natural events such as hurricanes and tornadoes.
On the last ACEP report card, which was published in 2009, the nation earned a C- for overall emergency care.  “America’s grade for Access to Emergency Care was a near-failing D- because of declines in nearly every measure,” said Dr. Jon Mark Hirshon, chair of the team that directed the survey. “It reflects that hospitals are not getting the necessary support in order to provide effective and efficient emergency care.”
“There were 19 more hospital closures in 2011, and psychiatric care beds and hospital inpatients beds have fallen significantly, despite increasing demand,” he added.  “People are increasingly reliant on emergency care, and primary care physicians are advising their patients to go to the emergency department after hours to receive complex diagnostic workups and to facilitate admissions for acutely ill patients.”
The District of Columbia received the highest ranking for its emergency system, garnering a B- in the study.  DC was followed by Massachusetts, which had topped the list in 2009, as well as Maine, Nebraska, and Colorado to round out the top five.  Wyoming received the lowest grade in the nation, and was branded with an F for its overall ED efforts.  Arkansas, New Mexico, Montana, and Kentucky were also at the bottom of the list.
Dig Deeper
KLAS: Epic Systems, Cerner Lead EHR Vendors in Sepsis Analytics
Decision Support, Big Data Analytics Reduce Hospital Blood Use
CA Children’s Hospitals Win Davies Award for Analytics, Safety
Illinois, Indiana, Montana, South Carolina, Maine, and Washington State were among the thirteen states to fail disaster preparedness.  “Everyone hopes that their communities would perform as well as Boston did after the Marathon bombing, yet nearly half the states received either D’s or F’s for Disaster Preparedness, which is alarming,” said Dr. Alex Rosenau, president of the ACEP. “While there has been increased state and federal focus on disaster preparedness, there is great variability among states in terms of planning and response capacity.”
In order to boost the quality and readiness of emergency care programs, ACEP provided several recommendations, including an increase in funding for safety net facilities and programs to address chronic shortages of qualified physicians and nurses.  The organization also suggests that lawmakers support efforts to fund the Office of Emergency Care Research, a new program that falls under the jurisdiction of the National Institutes of Health.
“Congress and President Obama must make it a national priority to strengthen the emergency medical care system,” said Rosenau. “There were more than 130 million emergency visits in 2010, or 247 visits per minute. With so much changing in health care, emergency care has never been more important to our communities. This Report Card is a call to action.”
Tagged Healthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare QualityHospital QualityPatient CarePatient Safety


