Hospital quality experts see fewer readmissions as top goal

July 02, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 02, 2014 - Reducing preventable readmissions is one of the most important goals for cutting healthcare costs, says a poll of healthcare quality improvement experts by ASQ, and should be a top priority for healthcare organizations seeking to tighten up their bottom lines.   The online poll of more than 300 ASQ members cited a number of financial barriers to improvements in quality that might prevent patients from landing back in the hospital, including a lack of attention to health maintenance, fragmented care, and struggles to break even from Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements.
“It seems like healthcare providers are often faced with demands and/or provided incentives that are inconsistent or even at cross-purposes with the principles of high-quality, efficient medical care,” said Dr. Joseph Fortuna, immediate past chair of ASQ’s Healthcare Division. “As an example, it makes no sense for primary care doctors to be paid on volume of patients seen rather than outcomes of care.”
The participants seemed eager to accelerate the shift to pay-for-performance reimbursement models, with the redesign of healthcare delivery models top on their wish-list.  Including lower-cost, higher-availability alternatives to traditional physician care, such as the utilization of nurse practitioners and physician assistants, can expand the reach of the healthcare system, while implementing patient care coordination programs can ensure a focus on continued wellness and medication adherence.
“As we’ve learned over time, process redesign coupled with culture change can have a huge impact on raising quality and lowering cost,” Fortuna said.
Dig Deeper
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Applications Close Sept. 15
Clinical Decision Support App May Cut CTs for Head Injuries
Medicare and Medicaid funding challenges were ranked as the most serious obstacle for providers seeking an effective, cost-efficient healthcare system, and the Affordable Care Act wasn’t far behind.  From the lower reimbursements provided by payers in health insurance exchanges to how healthcare organizations can set prices under the ACA, the healthcare reform law was seen as a major challenge to overcome.
However, the participants noted that there is plenty a healthcare organization can do on their own to cut costs.  Using data analytics to track clinical and financial processes can help to better utilize scarce resources, while integrated EHRs can decrease errors and improve the patient experience.  Providers should work to collaborate across service lines and departments, the poll says, and use process improvement and quality management systems and tools to streamline workflows, standardize clinical operations, and ensure high operational quality.
Tagged Accountable CareHospital QualityPatient Care


