Five Questions to Assess Your Readiness for Accountable Care

November 06, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Is your healthcare organization prepared to take on the technical and cultural changes involved in accountable care?
November 06, 2014 - Both payers and healthcare providers are starting to embrace accountable care arrangements as a way to drive down costs, improve patient care, foster population health management, and even see some financial rewards, but the pay-for-performance reimbursement structure may not be for everyone.  Accountable care organizations (ACOs) may be poised to accelerate in the next three to five years, but some high-profile departures from the CMS Pioneer ACO program clearly illustrate that not every provider is cut out to embrace the level of transformation and financial risk required for the move.
For providers who may be considering a switch to accountable care, an internal assessment of resources, capabilities, and goals is an essential piece of the roadmap towards value-based care.  Here are five basic questions s to ask yourself before committing to a healthcare makeover.
Are you financially prepared to accept risk?
While ACOs are intended to save money long-term, there are some initial costs involved in preparing a practice for a new way of life.  The top cost is likely to be infrastructure improvements, including health information exchange and quality metric reporting capabilities that don’t always come cheap if an organization is running outdated software.
Providers must also take into account that pay-for-performance reimbursements are likely to disrupt the revenue cycle, but the organization may not always understand just how much without a thorough impact assessment – and perhaps with a little help.
READ MORE: MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
“We see actuarial firms working as consultants with ACOs because for the first time, the provider might be taking on risk, and they’ve got to maybe design or revamp what their incentive program looks like, or what their pay for performance structures will be,” says Laura Beerman, Director of Customer Segment Analysis at Decision Resources Group, an expert on the growing trend of ACO facilitators.  “Bringing in an accounting expert can be really important for some organizations.”
Do you understand your patient population and their needs?
As opposed to fee-for-service reimbursement, accountable care requires a much deeper understanding of how to target necessary services to patients who are truly in need of the care.  Patient risk stratification and comprehensive population health management are must-haves for transitioning healthcare organizations, because they will no longer be paid for throwing everything at the wall and seeing what sticks.
Does your organization have a clear idea of how many patients require intensive engagement for chronic disease management?  Do you know how many of your patients haven’t been to their primary care provider for a year or more?  Accountable care organizations are still responsible for patients who hover around the fringes of the healthcare system, and may be on the line for serious financial impacts if those patients suddenly present with a crisis that could have been averted with better outreach, screenings, or education.
Do you have the EHR and health IT infrastructure?
READ MORE: ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
That sophisticated level of population health management relies on a health IT infrastructure that is lacking in some well-intentioned providers without big budgets.  While payers often have access to reams of data on patient claims and activities, and often pass on that information to their partners, healthcare providers must report back on quality measures.  The most successful ACOs are those with an understanding of how to collect, analyze, and present data in a way that drives actionable insights.
“As quality and utilization reporting becomes a critical piece of contracts between health systems and health plans, many have only the basic ability to analyze a subset of measures,” writes Luke Shulman, Principal Consultant at Arcadia Healthcare Solutions.  “To really drive improvement, systems need a broad and unified dataset with three advanced capabilities: a longitudinal population view, the ability to forecast contract performance and an overall means to foster trust and confidence in the data.”
A recent eHealth Initiative survey found that 86% of ACOs are EHR users, while 74% have disease registries and 68% are currently leveraging a data warehouse, which illustrates the need for a high reliance on health IT to drive success.
Are you plugged in with your business partners and the community?
These technologies can also help to foster better relationships and a higher level of interoperability with business partners along the care continuum.  Care coordination is a key feature of accountable care.  Providers are answerable for reducing costly repeated tests and ensuring smooth transitions with fewer opportunities for patient safety errors from poor medication reconciliation or other gaps in communication.  Establishing firm responsibilities and clear expectations among frequent partners can help to ensure that everyone assuming any level of risk is working together to manage a patient’s health in a holistic way.
READ MORE: CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
Establishing better relationships with community entities can also give ACOs a jump on population health management.  Many of the neediest patients rely on community services provided by schools, churches, social outreach programs, or caseworkers.  “Some people who are vulnerable are not linked to anything, and those are the trickiest people to find,” said Kathleen Westcoat, executive director of Health Care Access Maryland, which is working with US census data and population health analytics to provide care to homeless, low-income, and uninsured patients in the Baltimore region. “Being where people go is really critical.”
Have you fostered a progressive corporate culture of change?
Making the commitment to accountable care is not always an easy decision, nor is it come that should be taken lightly.  Clinical and administrative staff will both be impacted by changes in workflow, different methods of decision making, increased reporting requirements, and more pressure to produce better patient outcomes and high quality care.  While it may seem a daunting proposition, organizations adequately prepare their staff for the challenges at hand can meet the high expectations of accountable care.
“We have changed the culture in Michigan as a result of this program,” says David Share, MD, MPH, Senior Vice President of Value Partnerships at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan.  Seventy-five Michigan hospitals that committed to a series of collaborative quality initiatives (CQI) have generated nearly $600 million in cost savings, in part due to the enthusiasm of the providers themselves.
“While it’s hard work to capture the data from the electronic record, to add to the data by looking at the record, to come together to examine performance and make changes, they have incorporated this into a culture of collaboration and a culture of improvement that is professionally very inspiring,” he said. “They get excited to come to the meetings, see their colleagues, and learn from and talk with one another.  They feel real ownership of this — they’re really proud of it — but it lets them be better doctors, nurses, and so forth and it lets them and the hospitals they work in achieve better outcomes.”
Properly engaging healthcare providers to make the changes necessary for accountable care success may be a challenge, but it one of the most important aspects of laying the groundwork for improved efficiency, quality, spending, and satisfaction for providers and their patients.
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsPopulation Health Management


