Behavioral Health Homes Boost Patient Engagement, Self-Management

March 20, 2018

By Jessica Kent
March 20, 2018 - The implementation of behavioral health home models could improve patient self-management, increase patient engagement, and enhance understanding of the connection between physical and mental health, according to a study published in Health Affairs.
The report noted that adults with serious mental illness are one of the most medically vulnerable populations in the US, as they experience decreased life expectancy and poorer overall health outcomes due to the prevalence of physical comorbidities.
Provider organizations need to do more to integrate physical and mental healthcare while creating a culture of wellness and prevention, the researchers said.
Dig Deeper
Patient Engagement Must Be Top Priority for Quality Healthcare
Why Mental Healthcare is Key to Population Health Management
Identifying Care Disparities for Population Health Management
To address this issue, Community Care Behavioral Health Organization, a nonprofit behavioral health managed care organization that is part of the UPMC Insurance Services Division, developed a model called the Behavioral Health Home Plus.
The Behavioral Health Home Plus model works to create a culture of wellness by training providers in wellness techniques and principles. Each participating organization identified several staff members to serve as wellness champions and trainers who would help improve individual providers’ abilities to talk about health and wellness with patients who have serious mental illnesses.
These wellness champions and trainers also aimed to enhance patient engagement with primary care providers and promote recovery by helping patients achieve physical, social, emotional, and financial wellness.
Providers participated in learning collaboratives to support implementation of the Behavioral Health Home Plus model. Providers were able to share experiences, continuously work to improve care quality, and monitor intervention activities.
The model applies two innovative approaches to behavioral health management activities to achieve wellness goals: Provider-Supported care and Patient Self-Directed care.
Provider-Supported care includes wellness nurses who help educate staff and coordinate services for patients, and Patient Self-Directed care encourages patient autonomy and engagement via an online patient portal.
Researchers sought to explore which of these two approaches would produce the most improvements in perceived mental health status, patient activation, and engagement in primary and specialty care for patients with serious mental illness. They implemented one of the two approaches in eleven mental health centers across Pennsylvania and evaluated the results over a two-year period.  
Ultimately, both approaches produced similar changes, suggesting that each can contribute to improvements in patient self-management and engagement.
The Patient Activation Measure, which evaluates patients’ confidence and ability to improve and manage their mental health, increased by nearly two points in both the Provider-Supported and Patient Self-Directed groups.
Patient engagement in primary or specialty care increased by 36 percent overall for both approaches.
Overall perceived mental health scores improved from 39.3 to 39.9.
In addition, learning collaborative data showed improvements in providers’ development of wellness goals, patients’ use of self-management tools, and confidence and involvement among patients and providers in working toward improved health and wellness.
These results have promising implications for the future of care delivery for patients with serious mental illness.
“Our findings suggest that payers may be able to leverage their unique relationships with community mental health providers to improve outcomes for patients, and to integrate physical health and wellness support into their existing care delivery settings,” the researchers wrote.
Organizations that train staff members in wellness principles and use self-management resources to support patients with serious mental illnesses can see an improvement in patient-centered outcomes.
“The findings from our study can inform national efforts to avoid or reduce early mortality and comorbidity among people with serious mental illness and inform the more efficient, tailored, and rapid diffusion of promising models in routine behavioral health care settings,” the team concluded.
Tagged Mental HealthMental Health ProvidersPatient EngagementPatient Engagement StrategiesPatient Outcomes


