What to Expect at AHIMA: ICD-10, Big Data, Population Health

September 25, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 25, 2015 - The 2015 AHIMA Convention may be taking place in the Big Easy next week, but there’s nothing simple about any of the top issues that attendees are facing as an eventful year in healthcare comes to a close. 
Thousands of health information management and health IT professionals will be descending on New Orleans to discuss the industry’s most pressing challenges, including big data analytics, information governance, population health management – and, of course, the imminent ICD-10 implementation.
HealthITAnalytics.com will be on the floor to bring you the latest news from the show, including educational sessions, exclusive interviews, and keynote addresses from leaders in the HIM field. 
Whether you’re slipping on your comfortable shoes to take in some lectures and browse the vendor displays or tuning in from home or the office, you can follow HealthITAnalytics.com on Twitter for live coverage and breaking updates from the Morial Convention Center.
Here are some of the can’t-miss topics and events to look forward to over the next few days.
READ MORE: State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
Did someone say ICD-10?
There’s no doubt that the arrival of the new code set is going to be a major conversation point.  The convention ends on September 30, the day before the fateful go-live deadline, but there are still plenty of opportunities for HIM professionals to get some last-minute tips and encouragement from their peers.
On Saturday, Sue Bowman, RHIA, CCS, FAHIMA, MJ and Nelly Leon-Chisen, RHIA will provide an ICD-10 policy review, including updates from the 2016 Medicare Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Rule rule.  On Sunday, Kristen Bates, MBA, RHIA, CCS, CDIP and Susan Belley, RHIA, CPHQ will discuss how to boost coder confidence, how to identify common errors, and how to maintain a high degree of accuracy through post-implementation audits.
Other workshops will focus on clinical documentation improvement, implementing computer assisted coding tools, and keeping productivity levels high.  Learn about ICD-10 specifics such as coding for injuries and poisoning and reviewing MS-DRG shifts, or take a lesson from down under by hearing about Australia’s ICD-10 implementation journey.
Mitigation and contingency planning will also be on the agenda as providers look into the future of revenue cycle management under the new system.
READ MORE: Information Governance Gaining Ground in Healthcare Organizations
Laying the cornerstone of information governance
ICD-10 is just one small piece of the information governance puzzle, a significant focal point for AHIMA throughout its history.  As healthcare organizations generate and collect enormous volumes of clinical and operational data, it is becoming increasingly critical to develop a comprehensive strategy for normalizing, utilizing, and protecting these valuable resources.
Attend a pre-convention workshop exploring AHIMA’s information governance initiatives, or join a general session led by Deborah Green, MBA, RHIA about the importance of integrating governance strategies into all aspects of the healthcare organization.
Learn about the legal and compliance aspects of data governance from AHIMA leaders or listen to a case study from the Hospital Corporation of America (HCA) about the real-world applications of healthcare data governance and integrity.  Consider the implications of integrating patient-generated health data (PGHD) into the EHR or brush up on best practices for patient matching within the context of health information exchange.
Best practices for population health management
READ MORE: AHIMA Offers Clinical Documentation Tips for Opioid Abuse
With a strong data governance foundation in place, providers are eager to use their big data for population health management, risk stratification, cost cutting, and care coordination.  Health information managers play an important role in these initiatives, which run deeply throughout many different aspects of the organization.
Wendy Vincent from KPMG will discuss the impact of population health management on healthcare organizations and how to get started with a proactive approach to care.  Michele O'Connor, MPA, RHIA, FAHIMA, continues the conversation with a session on the critical importance of health data interoperability, while Barbara DeBuono, MD and Donna M. Smith, RHIA will address the underlying reimbursement reforms that will make population health management a worthwhile financial proposition.
Want to improve your patient engagement numbers?  Listen to Patricia Coffey, RHIA and Marisa Starr, RHIA outline how to take a multidisciplinary approach to implementing a patient portal, and sit in on a presentation by Truman Medical Centers representatives about bringing a meaningful patient portal experience to safety-net patient populations.
Achieving big results with big data analytics
Ready to put all these building blocks together to generate actionable insights?  Big data analytics is the way to go.  From leveraging predictive analytics for population health to improving operational efficiency by automating the reimbursement process, attendees will have endless opportunities to learn how to put their big data to good use.
Take part in a moderated discussion addressing why health information management professionals are at the core of all effective big data analytics programs, or hear informaticists from Wolters Kluwer Health explain the importance of data standards and normalization for population health and analytics.
How will big data analytics change the health information management profession, and how will it change healthcare at large?  Audience members can also hear from Dell and Mount Sinai Health System about using big data analytics to improve clinical decision-making, operational performance, and patient engagement.
Bringing home the drive to improve performance, quality, and outcomes
Attendees will leave the conference buzzing with ideas about how to integrate emerging organizational improvement strategies into their own practices and health systems.  With sessions on everything from EHR adoption to audits and compliance, informatics, HIE, CDI, and quality reporting, there will be no shortage of industry experts on hand to offer advice and answer questions.
As the healthcare industry prepares for the potential disruptions of ICD-10 and closes out an eventful 2015 with trepidation, anxiety, and hope for a transformative future, this year’s AHIMA Convention promises to provide valuable insight to health information management professionals facing a broad spectrum of challenges in the months ahead.
Don’t forget to follow HealthITAnalytics.com on Twitter and subscribe to our newsletters to get the latest news and information from the convention and beyond.
Tagged AHIMA 2015Big Data AnalyticsHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10Population Health Management


