AMA, CDC Launch Joint Type 2 Diabetes Prevention Effort

March 13, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 13, 2015 - The American Medical Association and the Centers for Disease Control have announced the launch of a new Type 2 diabetes prevention effort targeted at the thirty percent of Americans affected by pre-diabetes.  In a press conference this week, AMA and CDC leadership introduced their new population health management program called “Prevent Diabetes STAT: Screen, Test, Act – Today.”  The initiative includes educational resources for both providers and patients who may be at risk of developing the costly and serious chronic disease.
“Here, in one of the most medically advanced countries in the world, more than 86 million Americans are living with pre-diabetes, the precursor to Type 2 diabetes,” said AMA President Robert M. Wah, MD, during the announcement.  “And yet nearly 90 percent of them don’t even know they have it.”
“Think about that for a moment.  That’s one in every three people.  This isn’t just a concern.  It’s a crisis.  And it’s not just taking a physical and emotional toll on people living with pre-diabetes.  It’s also taking an economic toll on our country.  More than $245 billion each year in healthcare spending and reduced productivity is directly linked to diabetes.”
“The AMA and the CDC believe it’s time to bring an end to these dismal statistics,” Wah continued.  “Together, we’re sounding the alarm about pre-diabetes as a serious medical condition, and we’re calling on others to join us in taking immediate action to prevent type 2 diabetes – STAT.”
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
IBM Watson, Siemens Partner for Population Health Management
Value-Based Care Starts with Basic Population Health Management
In addition to the high number of pre-diabetics who are unaware of their status, a third of patients living with fully developed Type 2 diabetes are also undiagnosed and untreated.  Up to thirty percent of pre-diabetics will progress into full diabetes within five years, making early detection and treatment a top priority for healthcare providers. Diabetes was the seventh leading cause of death in the United States in 2010, though it may be under-recorded as a cause of death since the disease can lead to fatal heart attacks and strokes that often take precedence in mortality data.
“To address and reverse this alarming national trend, America needs frontline physicians and other health care professionals as well as key stakeholders such as employers, insurers, and community organizations to mobilize and create stronger linkages between the care delivery system, our communities, and the patients we serve,” Wah added.
“The time to act is now. We need a national, concerted effort to prevent additional cases of Type 2 diabetes in our nation – and we need it now,” said Ann Albright, PhD, RD, director of CDC’s Division of Diabetes Translation. “We have the scientific evidence and we’ve built the infrastructure to do something about it, but far too few people know they have pre-diabetes and that they can take action to prevent or delay developing type 2 diabetes.”
The STAT toolkit includes a fact sheet for providers explaining what evidence-based criteria should be used to diagnose pre-diabetes and refer patients to diabetes management programs.  It also provides a patient risk questionnaire, educational fliers to hand out to patients, and strategies to incorporate diabetes screenings, assessments, and patient risk stratification into the provider workflow.
“Our health care system simply cannot sustain the continued increases in the number of people developing diabetes.” said Albright. “Screening, testing and referring people at risk for type 2 diabetes to evidence-based lifestyle change programs are critical to preventing or delaying new cases of type 2 diabetes.”
“Long-term, we are confident that this important and necessary work will improve health outcomes and reduce the staggering burden associated with the public health epidemic of type 2 diabetes,” added Wah.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPatient CarePopulation Health Management


