Should providers add consumer data to clinical analytics?

June 27, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 27, 2014 - When it comes to healthcare, more data is usually better.  Physicians can only make correct diagnoses and prescribe the most effective treatments if they have all the information necessary to make good decisions, and sometimes those decisions hinge on the chance mention of a symptom or habit that a patient might think is irrelevant.  At the Carolinas HealthCare System, informaticists have started to include consumer purchasing data and public records into their population health management algorithms to better identify at-risk cases, a move that has angered some of the community.  Patients generally don’t want to be sick, so why are they pushing back against the inclusion of lifestyle data as part of their medical portrait?
Providers are becoming increasingly desperate to stem the rising time of chronic diseases and make proactive decisions to help populations manage their health, and they are relying on data to inform their efforts.  Through the implementation of sophisticated analytics infrastructures that extract millions of data points from EHRs, crunch numbers in ways no humans could manage, and spit out actionable steps towards stratifying patients according to their needs, healthcare organizations are arming themselves in  to win a fight that, one would think, has no losers.
With pay-for-performance reimbursement structures pushing the onus onto healthcare providers, they have been forced to acknowledge the fact that their responsibilities now extend far outside their own walls.  Accountable care is supposed to reduce the overall costs of the healthcare system, which has been hemorrhaging waste for nearly as long as it has existed, and taxpayers are generally on board with that idea.  But not everyone is pleased with the notion that more data for the healthcare system means less privacy for themselves.
“I think it’s a waste of time,” said Jorjanne Murray, a Type 1 diabetic from Charlotte, NC, to the Charlotte Observer.  Her health plan occasionally calls her to check up on her self-management, but she frequently ignores them.  “It is one thing to have a number I can call if I have a problem or question; it is another thing to get unsolicited phone calls. I don’t like that.”
“What we are looking to find are people before they end up in trouble,” counters Michael Dulin, Director of Research and Evidence-based Medicine at Carolinas. “The idea is to use big data and predictive models to think about population health and drill down to the individual levels to find someone running into trouble that we can reach out to and try to help out.”
READ MORE: Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
“Most of these things you can find out just by looking at the patient and seeing if they are overweight or asking them if they exercise and discussing that with them,” Murray replies.  But how many patients can honestly say they never told a little white lie to their physicians?  And, for that matter, how many physicians consistently screen for every possible disease risk factor during a ten or fifteen minute check-up?  A recent CDC study found that just 16% of providers screen patients for alcohol use, and just 17% discuss alcohol use with pregnant women.
The data being collected by Carolinas, which includes spending habits tracked by credit cards and store loyalty programs for more than two million patients, are correlated with clinical data to develop risk scores that are objective and evidence-based.  And patients are giving up this information anyway, Dulin adds.  Just signing up for a points program at the grocery store means the corporation can collect spending records. “The data is already used to market to people to get them to do things that might not always be in the best interest of the consumer.  We are looking to apply this for something good,” he argues.
Dulin acknowledges that patients have a higher expectation of privacy when it comes to their healthcare information, and Carolinas is considering developing an opt-out system for data collection to allay those patients’ concerns.  According to the health system’s agreement with its unnamed data provider, Carolinas cannot access specific, individual transactions, and they can’t disclose details of their data other than the end-result risk score.
And perhaps Murray has a point about her unsolicited phone calls.  No one wants to be told by an anonymous voice on the telephone that they need to buy fewer cupcakes or they’ll be dead of a heart attack in ten years.  Population health management is supposed to be a gateway into individualized care, coordinated and built around a patient’s needs and circumstances.  That’s the critical step for making data work towards better health, Dulin agrees.  “You have to have a relationship,” he says. “It just can’t be a phone call from someone saying ‘do this’ or it just feels creepy.  The data itself doesn’t tell you the story of the person.  You have to use it to find a way to connect with that person.”
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


