Will the White House Chart a Course for Healthcare Big Data?

February 25, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 25, 2015 - Last week, the White House announced a new addition to the nation’s top technology team, just in time to get President Obama’s precision medicine initiative off the ground.  Dhanurjay “DJ” Patil, a Silicon Valley regular with significant experience in big data science, is now the nation’s first Chief Data Scientist and Deputy Chief Technology Officer for Data Policy, and will advocate for the expansion of big data analytics across all areas of government – including healthcare.  How will Patil and other data science leaders address the growing need for actionable analytics for patients and providers?
“As Chief Data Scientist, DJ will help shape policies and practices to help the US remain a leader in technology and innovation, foster partnerships to help responsibly maximize the nation’s return on its investment in data, and help to recruit and retain the best minds in data science to join us in serving the public,” wrote Chief Technology Officer Megan Smith in a White House blog post.
“DJ will also work on the Administration’s Precision Medicine Initiative, which focuses on utilizing advances in data and health care to provide clinicians with new tools, knowledge, and therapies to select which treatments will work best for which patients, while protecting patient privacy.”
With previous experience at a number of household name companies, including LinkedIn, Skype, and eBay, Patil certainly knows what it takes to develop and manage big data at scale.  While a stint at the Department of Defense brought predictive analytics to the struggle for homeland security, healthcare has been engaged in a long-term fight against enemies on a similarly large and diverse number of fronts.
Dig Deeper
State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
TGen Launches Discovery Platform to Boost Genomic Data Analysis
Tech Giants Give Healthcare Artificial Intelligence Start-Ups a Boost
The healthcare industry is just beginning to understand what big data is and how to harness it, and there is no shortage of roadblocks to make that process a difficult one.  Hampered by a chronic lack of health IT interoperability, a dearth of data standards, and any number of competing initiatives dragging their attention from one major project to the next, the addition of some guidance from on high might be a serious benefit for analytics-minded providers.
But where will Patil and other data science experts take the industry if it commits to hopping on board the big data bus?  The centerpiece of the new precision medicine project, the creation of a large-scale DNA databank, may be a desirable development for medical researchers, genomics buffs, and pharmaceutical companies.
But the majority of healthcare organizations aren’t primarily focused on hoarding genomes to uncover treatments for rare cancers.  They want to use big data to get paid.  They need help treating diabetics that come to the emergency department again and again, and coordinating care for the stroke patients that need round-the-clock monitoring.  They want healthcare big data to help them prevent heart attacks, cope with the financial stresses of obesity, and ease the inevitable transition into risk-sharing and accountable care.
Healthcare big data will only mean something to providers if the White House can figure out how to get it to solve the everyday problems of patients and providers at the national level – without imposing more unfunded mandates or leaving small, rural, and cash-strapped providers in the dust.  The ongoing successes and failures of the EHR Incentive Programs may provide some valuable reading material for new high-level staff entering the federal healthcare arena, especially since the majority of early meaningful use leaders have departed for greener pastures.
Of course, healthcare’s big data problem will only be a small piece of Patil’s responsibilities, and the initial phases of the precision medicine initiative are complicated enough to keep him busy for quite a while.  There are few standardized regulations and accepted best practices approaches for large-scale genomics, and developing a framework for deep and meaningful research will be an enormous task.
In the meantime, individual providers, collaborative partnerships, professional societies, and academic institutions will continue to chip away at the big data conundrum with risk scores, databanks, population health management programs, and clinical analytics infrastructure as they have always done.
But as healthcare big data continues to accumulate at rates faster than any one entity can handle, the need for federal leadership in the pursuit of an interoperable, big data-driven healthcare ecosystem will become ever more apparent as reimbursement reforms squeeze budgets and foment widespread change.
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsHealthcare Data Analytics


