HIMSS Analytics: CAC Tools Slated for Growth Ahead of ICD-10

October 21, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 21, 2014 - Computer assisted coding (CAC) applications are becoming increasingly popular in hospitals as healthcare organizations gear up for ICD-10, according to the latest HIMSS Analytics Essentials of the US Hospital IT Market report.  Of the 25 types of support service applications and technologies profiled in the report, CAC showed the most significant growth potential as hospitals start to feel the imminence of October 1, 2015.
“In preparation for the shift to ICD-10, it is no surprise that the sales potential for coding solutions is high,” said Lorren Pettit, Vice President of Market Research for HIMSS Analytics. “The findings suggest that market opportunities are ripe for vendors with Computer Assisted Coding solutions.”
CAC is considered an important tool for training coders in the complexity and detail of ICD-10, but should only be once piece of a comprehensive educational program.  CAC cannot replace human intelligence when it comes to the new code set, experts are quick to stress.  Instead, it feeds off a combination of clean, complete clinical documentation, natural language processing, and the expertise of coders to identify incorrect or unspecific code assignations.
“Hospitals are looking for ways to really hang on to that revenue and also be able to drop their claims with the most accurate codes possible,” Mel Tully, MSN, CCDS, CDIP and Vice President of Clinical Services and Education at Nuance, said last year.  “There was a huge flurry in the industry with everyone thinking that CAC was going to be the perfect solution.  It’s a great tool, but you’ve got to seed it with the correct information.”
Dig Deeper
Illinois to Use Blockchain for Healthcare Credential Management
Population Health Nurses Require Changes in Education, Practices
Providers Struggle with Time, Tools for Revenue Cycle Analytics
The one-year delay that pushed ICD-10 back until 2015 may be spurring the growth of CAC implementations in hospitals that are taking advantage of the extra twelve months to ramp up their transition activities.  As more and more vendors start to deliver ICD-10 compliant technologies and wide-spread infrastructure updates start getting underway, hospitals may be seeing the climate of change as an opportunity to provide coders with some computer-generated assistance.
CMS has been encouraging this view of the “delay” as an “extension,” and urges providers to take advantage of data-driven IT tools that can ease the anticipated pain of productivity losses, slowed claims processing, and increased payment denials.
“When [the ICD-10 implementation date] was October 2014, providers felt like they were rushed,” explains Deborah Neville, Director of Revenue Cycle, Coding, and Compliance at Elsevier. “Maybe adding another year will put them in the mindset that they can really sit down and determine how much time they can devote to their education and, perhaps, be a lot more thoughtful in what is really critical.  Industry-wide, they were saying they anticipated a 50% reduction in productivity and accuracy.  So with another year to learn ICD-10 and practice, that number may not be anywhere near as significant.”
  Tagged Healthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data ManagementICD-10


