CMS: MACRA Will Improve Rural Care Access, Population Health

October 12, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 12, 2016 - The MACRA Quality Payment Program (QPP) will play an instrumental role in continuing to improve access to care and population health for patients living in rural areas by encouraging providers to deliver data-driven, value-based services, CMS said in a blog post this week. 
The QPP, which includes the two major participation tracks under MACRA – the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) and the Advanced Alternative Payment Models (APMs) – will include a “special effort” to help clinicians in rural areas meet high quality standards.
Rural patients face a number of unique challenges that often delay or prevent access to necessary services, wrote Dr. Cara James, Director of CMS Office of Minority Health, and John Hammarlund, Regional Administrator. 
“Since the Affordable Care Act was signed into law by President Obama in 2010, uninsured rates in rural America have dropped by nearly 40 percent with corresponding improvements in access to care,” they acknowledged.
“Nevertheless, rural Americans are more likely to live in states that have not expanded Medicaid, more likely to live in areas with fewer physicians per capita, and more likely to have difficulty accessing timely emergency care.”
READ MORE: EHR Adoption, Population Health a Struggle for Rural Providers
Even when patients are able to travel long distances for care, they are often met with healthcare organizations that are struggling with a number of health IT challenges. 
Lower-than-average EHR adoption rates among rural providers and critical access hospitals (CAHs) make it difficult to engage in risk stratification, preventative health strategies, and population health management programs.  
And some providers still lack the reliable access to broadband internet required for timely and consistent health information exchange, patient engagement, and telehealth.
“CMS has undertaken a number of efforts to reach out to stakeholders to hear about ways to improve access to services for rural Americans,” James and Hammarlund said.  Earlier in 2016, CMS created the Rural Health Council, a panel of experts from across the federal agency designed to address the persistent obstacles of rural healthcare.
“The Rural Health Council has been thinking about three strategic areas: first, ways to improve access to care for all Americans in rural settings; second, ways to support the unique economics of providing health care in rural America; and third, making sure the health care innovation agenda appropriately fits rural health care markets,” the blog post said.
READ MORE: EHR Optimization is Key for Quality Reporting, Population Health
Recent Medicare reforms have significantly reduced regulatory burdens on rural health providers, James and Hammarlund added, and these changes are likely to save stakeholders approximately $3.2 billion over the next five years.
These changes will better prepare the rural health community for the enhanced requirements of MACRA, which intends to accelerate the shift from volume to value.  CMS will pay close attention to the needs of rural organizations during the transition, the authors stated.
“Going forward, we’re continuing to embed a rural focus into new programs. For example, with the proposed new Quality Payment Program, we’re making a special effort to reach clinicians in rural areas,” they wrote.
“Through technical assistance and other activities, we’ll help them transition to the proposed Quality Payment Program’s new approach for paying clinicians for the value and quality of care they provide.”
In the meantime, CMS has placed rural health coordinators at each of its Regional Offices, established monthly meetings with the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), and has made a concerted effort to collect feedback from the provider community about their most pressing concerns.
READ MORE: How Healthcare Big Data Analytics Helps Build Smart Societies
“Through our rural health coordinators and the Rural Health Council, CMS has conducted nearly two dozen listening engagements nationwide on key rural health issues, such as telemedicine, hospice, and hospital support,” said James and Hammarlund. “We’ve heard directly from physicians and hospitals who are treating their patients while juggling the unique challenges of rural health care.”
Additional opportunities for stakeholder feedback are on the agenda, they continued.  On October 19, the CMS Rural Health Solutions Summit will meet in Baltimore to bolster the discussion.
“The CMS Rural Health Council will be bringing in stakeholders from all sectors of the health care industry as we engage in in-depth discussions about ways to improve access to care in rural America and support local innovation in care delivery,” the blog post says.
“We’re excited to bring together national, state, and local leaders to discuss innovative strategies for improving rural care, access, and cost. This discussion will help us work together towards rural health policy and implementation that drives high-value, high-quality health care.”
Registration is available online for interested parties.
“We hope that all of our ongoing efforts, including the work of the CMS Rural Health Council, will give us a better understanding of how our policies and programs affect rural communities,” the post concluded.
Identifying Care Disparities for Population Health Management
CMS Timelines for Stage 3 Meaningful Use, MACRA Implementation
Tagged MACRAPopulation Health ManagementRural HospitalsValue Based Care


