Parents unsure of care coordination responsibilities, procedures

January 29, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 29, 2014 - Parents of children who need to be referred to a specialist are generally unsure of how to best arrange appointments and who should take the lead on issues like insurance coverage, expertise, and scheduling.  A poll conducted by the University of Michigan’s C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital shows that clear paths towards care coordination are lacking for the 46% of parents who have had to see a specialist for their child, potentially putting their health at risk.
“For a parent, hearing that a child needs to see a specialist is often cause for concern. Confusion about their responsibilities for arranging specialty care can add to parents’ anxiety,” says Sarah J. Clark, MPH, associate director of the National Poll on Children’s Health and associate research scientist in the UM Department of Pediatrics.
More than 1200 parents were asked about who should take responsibility for arranging appointments and choosing a referring physician.  Fifty-two percent said that the primary care physician should pick the best specialist, while 55% added that the PCP should ensure that the specialist takes their insurance.  Parents whose children are Medicaid beneficiaries were more likely than the privately insured to say that PCPs should handle these administrative tasks.
Parents are generally united on issues of the specialist’s qualifications, however.  The vast majority think it’s very important that the specialist be trained in pediatrics and have affiliations with a highly-rated hospital.  Half of respondents would like the physician to be actively involved in research so that he or she is aware of the latest treatments available for the child’s needs.  These concerns ranked far above the office being in a convenient location or the physician’s hours fitting neatly into the family’s schedule.
Dig Deeper
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
“This poll shows a wide range of views about who is supposed to do what, so it’s not unexpected that sometimes the process doesn’t work well,” says Clark. “Primary care providers cannot assume that parents understand their responsibilities around making specialty appointments.  Clear communication — ideally, with instructions written in plain language — will help parents ensure their kids get the care they need.  If a referral is delayed or it doesn’t happen at all, a child’s health can be put at risk.”
Tagged Care CoordinationPatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


