CMS Eases Medicaid Barriers to Substance Abuse, Opioid Treatment

November 02, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 02, 2017 - State Medicaid programs will have more opportunities to design programs to meet their residents’ substance abuse and opioid addiction treatment needs, CMS announced this week.
Following the declaration of the opioid abuse epidemic as a national public health emergency, CMS is encouraging states to design innovative demonstration projects with fewer regulatory barriers.
“CMS is now offering a more flexible, streamlined approach to accelerate states’ ability to respond to the national opioid crisis while enhancing states’ monitoring and reporting of the impact of any changes implemented through these demonstrations,” wrote Brian Neale, CMS Deputy Administrator and Director for the Center for Medicaid and CHIP Services, in a letter to state Medicaid administrators.
“As the opioid crisis continues to raise alarm and highlight the need for better access to high quality, evidence-based treatment, CMS would like to partner with states to support ways to progressively improve outcomes for Medicaid beneficiaries struggling with addiction in the context of 5-year demonstrations.”
CMS will use its section 1115 waiver authority to allow states to bypass certain federal requirements related to architecting demonstration projects, Neale said, in order to speed the process of implementing new techniques for patient management.
READ MORE: For Opioids and Substance Abuse, Big Data Analytics Is Just the Beginning
Instead of being required to build out an entire SUD delivery system before gaining Medicaid approval, states will have more flexibility to make incremental improvements over time.
States must still meet rigorous criteria for evaluating the effectiveness of demonstrations related to opioids and substance abuse, however, and must keep their initiatives budget-neutral.
Utah is one of the first states to see its waiver request approved under the new strategy.
"I've always maintained the role of the federal government should be to provide states with the flexibility to be innovative in how they operate their Medicaid programs. Nobody knows how to address the unique challenges we face as a state better than we do,” said Utah Governor Gary R. Herbert.
“Today's announcement from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services will allow us to address a specific challenge - extending health care coverage, including substance abuse and mental health services, to the homeless population. I applaud CMS for approving our waiver request, and look forward to getting to work on providing these critical services."
READ MORE: Addressing Opioid Abuse with Analytics, Population Health Strategies
State-level programs that reflect the unique needs of local populations and proactively address substance abuse may be able to reduce overall Medicaid costs, Neale wrote. 
“Between 2010 and 2013, among adult Medicaid beneficiaries treated for a behavioral health disorder, 75 percent of spending for these individuals was for treatment of comorbid conditions as opposed to their behavioral health condition. At least one state has found significant reductions in medical costs among Medicaid beneficiaries who accessed addiction treatment compared to those who did not.”
Demonstration projects could also improve outcomes by enhancing follow-up treatment and longer-term care, the letter added.  More than two-thirds of patients discharged from inpatient substance abuse treatment do not access any follow-up services within 14 days of discharge.
A lack of longer term engagement is correlated with higher likelihoods of overdose or readmission to an intensive care facility, said Neale.
Enhancing the care continuum for individuals with substance abuse disorders to prevent negative downstream impacts is a primary objective for CMS, officials have said.
READ MORE: ICU Admissions from Opioid Overdoses Increase 34% Since 2009
Increasing treatment adherence and retention, reducing overdoses and readmissions, improving access to care, and identifying at-risk individuals sooner are among the agency’s six major goals.
States will be expected to show progress towards achieving these improved outcomes by designing demonstration projects with specific major milestones in mind:
Access to critical levels of care for OUD and other SUDs
Widespread use of evidence-based, SUD-specific patient placement criteria
Use of nationally recognized, evidence-based SUD program standards to set residential treatment provider qualifications
Sufficient provider capacity at each level of care
Implementation of comprehensive treatment and prevention strategies to address opioid abuse and OUD
Improved care coordination and transitions between levels of care
“CMS will also work with participating states to develop monitoring protocols that will identify reasonable degrees of improvement on each of the agreed upon performance measures as well as specifics regarding data collection, analytic methodology, and how the states will construct baselines for each data point and performance measure against which the state’s progress will be measured,” said Neale.
“CMS will also work with the states to determine the frequency of reporting on each of these milestones and performance measures.”
State Medicaid programs can develop these monitoring protocols after receiving waiver approval to further streamline the process.
“CMS is available to provide technical assistance to states on how to meet federal transparency requirements as well as to preview states' draft 1115 proposals and public notice documentation to help ensure states successfully meet federal requirements,” the letter concludes.
Demonstration applications may be submitted electronically to 1115DemoRequests@cms.hhs.gov or by mail at an address included in the letter.
“CMS hopes states will use this opportunity to improve addiction treatment for Medicaid beneficiaries,” said Neale.  “We look forward to continuing our work together on these important issues.”
Tagged Behavioral HealthcareChronic Disease ManagementCMSMedicaidMental HealthPopulation Health Management


