Accountable Care, Big Data Analytics Attract Vendor Attention

August 13, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 13, 2015 - Product vendors and service providers targeting the healthcare systems’ growing appetite for advanced big data analytics and accountable care capabilities are continuing to make strategic moves in a swiftly changing marketplace.  
With billions of dollars of revenue potentially up for grabs as providers seek to position themselves for success in a value-based reimbursement universe, visionaries, venture capitalists, and savvy executives are gobbling up smaller rivals and funding innovative ideas in a volatile health IT environment.
In this roundup, HealthITAnalytics.com recaps some of the major acquisitions and developments in the healthcare big data analytics market this month.
Premier, Inc. acquires Healthcare Insights, LLC for $65 million
Premier, Inc. hopes to boost its population health management, practice management, and big data analytics offerings by acquiring Healthcare Insights for $65 million in cash, the company reported this week.  Healthcare Insight’s revenue cycle management products will allow Premier to develop more integrated technologies that span clinical and financial aspects of managing a healthcare organization.  
READ MORE: CIOs Focus on EHR Optimization for Population Health, Analytics
"As the healthcare industry becomes more complex, value-driven, and data-dependent, the need for health systems to clearly understand their performance in every arena is a top concern," said Keith J. Figlioli, Premier's senior vice president of health informatics. "It is not enough to have financial, operational and clinical data. Health systems must understand how to translate that information into effective cost containment strategies, as well as superior clinical outcomes.”
For the past four years, Healthcare Insights has achieved a first place KLAS ranking for budgeting, with a customer base of more than 7500 users and 94 health systems, over half of which will bring new sales opportunities to Premier.
Aledade raises $30 million, expands accountable care work into seven new states
Former National Coordinator Dr. Farzad Mostashari is still making waves in the realm of healthcare reform with Aledade, an accountable care organization consultancy and service provider that has seen early success in the industry.  After raising $30 million in Series B capital this summer, Aledade is pushing forward with Medicare accountable care organizations in seven new states, bringing its total to eleven.
“Two months ago, we vowed to put our new funding to work by expanding our ACO partnership model to independent primary care physicians across the country,” said Mostashari, CEO and co-founder of Aledade. “Today, we are taking another step to fulfill that promise – and to deliver high-quality, value-based care to doctors and patients across the country. We’ve been working with practices in these states for months, and we’re already seeing the power of placing independent primary care doctors at the center of their patients’ care.”
READ MORE: ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
HP joins IBM and Dell as a big data analytics service provider
Large, established companies better known for their personal computing hardware than their interest in clinical analytics are reaching into the lucrative waters of healthcare big data analytics services, with Hewlett-Packard joining IBM and Dell in offering big data infrastructure capabilities to healthcare customers. 
With a focus on open source analytics technologies like Hadoop and an eye towards the development of the Internet of Things, HP has announced several different products and services that may interest healthcare developers and providers.
"Developers are the new heroes of the Idea Economy," said Colin Mahony. SVP and GM, HP Big Data Software. "HP is uniquely positioned to help businesses and developers thrive in this new world. Through our Haven and Haven OnDemand platforms, we are empowering these heroes to transform their business through data, by allowing them to harness the value of all forms of information, rapidly connect and apply open source, and quickly access the tools they need to build winning businesses."
Health Catalyst scoops up data warehouse architect Health Care DataWorks
READ MORE: Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
There’s one less rivalry in the big data analytics vendor world now that Health Catalyst has acquired one of its major competitors, Health Care DataWorks.  The deal will bring several coveted business intelligence and big data analytics customers into the Health Catalyst fold, including Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, MemorialCare Health System, and Tampa General Hospital.
“Cedars-Sinai has benefited significantly from its relationship with HCD over the past few years, and we expect our partnership to deepen and strengthen as HCD merges with Health Catalyst,” said Darren Dworkin, Chief Information Officer of Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and former HCD Board Member.
“We’re looking forward to working with the leaders of each of HCD’s health system clients to help accelerate outcomes improvement for these organizations,” added Dan Burton, CEO of Health Catalyst. “We are also excited to welcome the data warehousing team of HCD, including several of the founding members of the renowned Ohio State University data warehouse program, as part of Health Catalyst.”
“This merger strengthens our ability to offer health systems the most complete and flexible healthcare data warehousing and analytics solution, with proven services to help our clients identify and sustain meaningful improvements.”
Tagged Accountable CareAnalytics InfrastructureBig Data Analytics


