Population health, care coordination ideas get $110M from HHS

May 27, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 27, 2014 - As part of its Health Innovations Award program, twelve projects focusing on population health management, care coordination, interoperability, and financial and clinical analytics will receive up to $110 million in combined funding from the Department of Health and Human Services.  At the same time, HHS has made up to $730 million available to states seeking to transform their public and private health insurance structures to meet accountable care goals and encourage innovation across the healthcare delivery system.
“As a former governor, I understand the real sense of urgency states and local communities feel to improve the health of their populations while also reducing health care costs, and it’s critical that the many elements of health care in each state – including Medicaid, public health, and workforce training – work together,” outgoing HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said.  “To help, HHS will continue to encourage and assist them in their efforts to transform health care.
“These efforts will strengthen federal, state, and local partnerships, encourage broad stakeholder engagement, and capitalize on federal resources to ensure greater transformation of delivery of health care services,” added CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner.
With an average award size of about $9 million, the twelve projects receiving funding in Round Two of the program include academic institutes, professional societies, and healthcare providers across the country.  Some of the recipients include:
Dig Deeper
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
Payers, Providers Make Dental Care a Population Health Issue
North Shore-LIJ Health System on Long Island, New York, which will use its $2.5 million award to help coordinate the care of patients with late-stage chronic kidney diseases by using patient education, home dialysis, depression screenings, and other population health management techniques to reduce costs and preempt medical errors.
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, awarded $9.6 million to test its Mobile Acute Care Team (MACT) as a way to integrate the hospital-at-home model to reduce unnecessary admissions.  The MACT team will help treat patients for acute needs at home while integrating community care providers and providing appropriate referrals to non-hospital-based services.
The Association of American Medical Colleges was granted $7.1 million to test the scalability of electronic consults and referrals across five academic medical centers.  Integrated into its Epic EHR systems, the consortium will use standardized referral templates to ensure that patients receive the specialty help they need.
Regents of the University of Michigan will use $6.3 million to implement the Michigan Surgical and Health Optimization Program (MSHOP), which allows for real-time risk stratification for patients undergoing abdominal surgery.  Over the next three years, the system will be implemented at 40 Michigan hospitals.
A list of all twelve Round Two projects is available here.
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


