Why have hospitals stopped buying data analytics infrastructure?

January 28, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 28, 2014 - In consumer technology, trends are all about the next big thing.  The most recent generation of cell phone with the coolest features will always attract buyers who need to have the latest and greatest, no matter what the cost.  For businesses, including hospitals and other healthcare providers, technology purchasing is about getting what you need and sticking with it as long as humanly possible.
However, a seismic shift in how an industry operates often requires organizations to boost their investments in order to meet new challenges, which is exactly what has been happening in regards to EHR adoption and related health IT tools to aid data analytics and population health.
But the despite the recent focus on how to build an analytics infrastructure, and the common wisdom that hospitals are just at the beginning of a long, arduous process to get their technology in gear, the purchasing trend may already be on the wane.  Even though hospitals are still eager to fill out their IT suites with newer must-haves like patient portals, Lorren Pettit, Vice President of Market Research for HIMSS Analytics, believes we may have passed the peak of technology purchasing already as hospitals hunker down to face the oncoming storm of initiatives that will begin to buffet the industry in 2014.
“For the HIMSS Analytics Essentials of the US Hospital IT Market report, we have been looking at the percentages of all US hospitals that are actively involved in installing or acquiring IT in some way,” Pettit told HealthITAnalytics.  “We have actually seen a downward trend now.  It peaked last year.  Previously, the focus has been on the EHR, but I’d almost say that that trajectory is in transition, and we’re still trying to figure out why.”
Dig Deeper
Healthcare CIOs Turning to Data Analytics for Business Intelligence
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
Lack of Talent, Direction Afflict Healthcare Data Analytics Plans
Data analytics is becoming increasingly valuable to hospitals, and the latter stages of Meaningful Use will increase the emphasis on population health management techniques and accountable care.  However, just meeting the basic requirements can be a lot of work for many organizations, and may distract from more advanced analytics work.  “Everyone’s trying to get their term papers in on time,” Pettit said.  “But also, a lot of organizations have gathered these technologies, and there’s starting to be a greater question now about what they’re getting for this investment.  Are we really seeing benefits?  I think that may be part of what’s impacting the purchasing trends.”
“The benefits of clinical quality or patient experience are not really fully realized until hospitals reach Stages 6 and 7 of the HIMSS EMRAM Adoption Scale,” he added.  “That’s when you start to see some very distinct differences.  It’s actually sort of very discouraging, because if you’re at Stage 3 or Stage 4 you’re putting all this effort and investment in, but you’re not realizing a lot of gains.  It isn’t until the car is more fully built until we actually start to see some movement.”
But hospitals are still having trouble getting there.  Whether it’s discouragement or a lack of funds, competing initiatives or struggles with assimilating new technologies into the workflow, many organizations haven’t been able to make it over the hump.  “When you look at the pace at which hospitals are adopting the EMR, about a quarter have stagnated over the past five years,” Pettit said.  “They just haven’t moved.  Now, some may have been at Stage 6 during that whole period and just haven’t moved up to Stage 7.  But there are some that were in Stage 0 and have not moved.  That’s pretty disconcerting.”
“You have to be all in, and you have to realize that if you’re not, your gains may be minimal at best.  That’s the message that needs to get out.  I haven’t seen it as widely embraced as it should be.  There’s been this focus on hitting Meaningful Use stage by stage, but less of a focus on the big picture here.”
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR AnalyticsEHR UseHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare Data Strategy


