Patient decision support: How mHealth impacts positive behavior

July 22, 2014

By Sponsored Content
July 22, 2014 - Healthcare is starting to get more personal. As the finance and entertainment industries have become on-demand, consumer-driven fields in the recent past, healthcare, too, is moving away from being provider-centric to patient-centric. Patients are now taking more control of when they access their healthcare and patient information. Rather than waiting for an appointment during clinic hours, patients can access their medical records from home, track their vitals with portable devices, and monitor their health-related habits with web-based applications (apps) on smartphones.
Estimates put the amount of health, fitness and medical apps currently available in major app stores to be over 97,000 individual apps described as tools to help users improve their health and wellness. While consumers certainly have their choice of apps to download that claim to help users lose weight, stop smoking or combat depression, most of the apps on the download market are not created or reviewed by clinicians, medical advisory boards, or public health institutions, and therefore, do not necessarily follow medical best practices and up-to-date guidelines.
The FDA estimates that 500 million people worldwide will use a health app by 2015. However, an IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics analysis found that only about 40 percent of these kinds of apps are “truly related to health care” and designed to be used by patients for health improvement. Of that 40 percent, only two thirds offered end-users“legitimate medical information.”Currently, the FDA only regulates the mobile medical apps that are “intended to be used as an accessory to a regulated medical device or transform a mobile platform into a regulated medical device.”
Despite the lack of regulation, the demand for health-related applications continues to grow. Patients want to experience healthcare the way they experience many aspects of their lives: delivered in real-time through their mobile devices, with information and settings tailored to their preferences. A Flurry analytics study on health apps found that there was a 62 percent increase in the use of health and fitness applications downloaded through iTunes during the first six months of 2014 alone. The growth of health and fitness apps is 87 percent faster than the (rapidly growing) app industry overall.
The Flurry study also revealed that the earliest adopters are what they deem “Fitness Fanatics,” a group comprised mostly of mothers aged 25 to 54 who are avid exercisers and concerned about living a healthy lifestyle. While it’s commendable that healthy, active people are using mobile apps to track their health-related behaviors, there is a tremendous opportunity to use apps to deliver care recommendations to patients identified in the high-risk strata of the population – those who have costly, chronic conditions i.e. diabetes, heart disease and those with smoking-related conditions. Through mobile apps, patients with chronic conditions can receive helpful guidance and support toward making healthy choices and effectively managing their conditions.
Healthcare providers and payers have a tremendous opportunity to deliver recommendations and information to the patients most in need of intervention through these applications. Delivering quality health and wellness programs through mobile apps can be a very effective method to help improve population health and make patients active participants in their health care. The potential for actionable population improvement via these apps lies in delivering evidence-based recommendations in real-time through leveraging a Clinical Decision Support (CDS) rules engine and predictive analytics.
Integrating a CDS rules engine into a health app will allow physicians to have real-time information at their fingertips, supporting more timely interventions based upon evidence-based recommendations sourced from a library of leading medical authorities and their respective best practice guidelines.
Using the principles of Cognitive Behavior Therapy, which examines the connections between thinking, feeling and behaving in order to stop patterns that lead to destructive actions and unhealthy lifestyles, apps integrated with CDS and predictive analytics can deliver helpful reminders, behavior modification suggestions, and strategies for improving user health. Applying analytics to patient-generated data can be very powerful.
For example, users can answer questions such as, “How would you rate your hunger this morning from 1 to 10?,” taking into account past user entered data, this would  allow the app to predict future behavior and make timely recommendations to prevent unhealthy or destructive behaviors in real-time.
As patients are faced with more choices that help determine their health outcomes, apps should be evaluated by both specialists and psychologists who can predict the ways an app should deliver information/recommendations in order to create changes in their patients’ behavior.
By reaching patients in real-time, and delivering evidence-based information via a device that they use to manage most aspects of their lives, the provider community has a powerful new tool to stop unhealthy, destructive behaviors before they even occur. Instead of having to wait for a yearly physical or an adverse event to receive recommendations on diet and exercise, a diabetic patient can receive healthy food swaps and exercise tips when they are reaching for a snack, or making the choice of what to do with their free time that evening.
Bi-directional communication can be used to impact behaviors. Not only can patients enter information, providers can use apps to directly communicate with their high-risk patients when they are between appointments. Providers are able to view patient entered data in real-time, and send timely messages back to the patients in order to provide acute care when needed. Patients feel a greater connection to their doctors thanks in part to the quick, personal communication that bi-directional apps can facilitate.
The future is full of possibilities for mobile healthcare management, and the industry will only continue to grow. Estimates predict that by 2017, the global mobile health app market will be worth $26 billion. Most of the revenue – about 84% will come from related services and products like wearable sensors. Patients will continue thinking more like consumers when it comes to their healthcare, so we must rise to the challenge of finding ways to both engage them and improve outcomes. Using mobile applications to monitor chronic conditions is only the beginning of the consumer health care paradigm shifts that are already in progress.
    Fauzia Khan, MD, FCAP, currently serves as chief medical officer of Alere Analytics, formerly DiagnosisOne, where she provides direction and leadership to develop practical and scalable technologies that allow Clinical Decision Support and Analytic capabilities to be seamlessly incorporated into clinical workflows.  She has expertise and passion for algorithm design, knowledge acquisition and engineering as well as data mining and leveraging these capabilities to improve outcomes. Prior to forming DiagnosisOne, Dr. Khan was the Director of Informatics at UMass Memorial Medical Center with ten years of experience in the hospital practicing pathology. She is the author, editor, and primary visionary of the “Guide to Diagnostic Medicine”, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2002.
  Tagged Clinical AnalyticsEHR Patient DataGlobal mHealthPopulation Health Management


