Survey: Big data analytics is just as important as the internet

September 12, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 12, 2014 - The vast majority of big data users are pleased with the results of their forays into data analytics, Accenture says in a new report, and 61% of businesses now believe that bigger and better data is extremely important to their organizations.  Users who invest in gaining a deeper understanding of the benefits of big data believe they can reap financial rewards from their initial outlays despite the need to tackle challenges related to data security, unstructured information, and acquiring qualified talent.
While the report is not specific to healthcare, instead surveying more than 1000 respondents from seven industries across the globe, the lessons apply to hospitals and health systems as easily as shipping conglomerates or manufacturing plants.  Organizations of all types are looking for help to manage petabytes of information while recognizing big data’s disruptive potential.  Eighty-nine percent of respondents to the survey think big data will transform business practices in the same way as the internet, while 79 percent believe that organizations that don’t embrace the data revolution will lose their competitive edge in the marketplace.
“Companies are moving rapidly to take advantage of maturing new technologies that move, mine and consume increasingly diverse data from an ever larger array of sources and sensors, driving outcomes sooner with greater impact than anyone imagined possible,” the survey states. “Users are structuring projects and expecting results in weeks or months, rather than losing years in the design phase. The result is an exponentially more complex and challenging environment: architectures and analysis are always on; vast volumes of data are being continuously gathered and must be consumed and analyzed at speed; more data means more noise around meaningful signals.”
Dig Deeper
Top 5 Reasons to be Thankful for Healthcare Big Data Analytics
AHIMA Releases New Clinical Documentation Improvement Toolkits
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
A total of 95% of organizations have sought outside help from consultants, contractors, or vendors to wrangle their data into shape, though 41% marked “lack of talent” as one of the main challenges they faced during the process.  Security concerns and budget restrictions hampered about half of the respondents, while integration and interoperability challenged 35 percent.
The impacts of harnessing big data will be widespread and varied, the survey predicts.  Nearly 40 percent of organizations believe that the top impact of big data will be changes to their customer relationships when they gain deeper insights into consumer behaviors, while 15 percent think data analytics will significantly alter the way they organize their operations.  Nine percent plan to optimize their supply chains with the help of more robust utilization data.
“Users welcome the disruption because they suspect that if they don’t harness the power of big data first, a known competitor or a company not even in their market today could attack tomorrow,” the report concludes. “Thinking about data as an asset requires organizations to change their mindsets, becoming more data-focused, and assembling and acquiring the skills needed to manage data at speed and at scale. Few enterprises can afford to be complacent when barriers to entry are being dramatically reduced by IT efficiencies and the advantages conferred by analytics and big data.”
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


