Definitive Healthcare Acquires Provider Database Publisher

November 10, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 10, 2015 - Definitive Healthcare, a leading source for data analytics and market intelligence in the healthcare space, has announced its acquisition of US Lifeline, which oversees an online healthcare organization database.
US Lifeline, a unity of Medical Distributions Solutions, Inc., is the publisher of Major Accounts Exchange (The MAX), which helps suppliers to the healthcare industry research integrated delivery networks (IDNs), hospitals, and group purchasing organizations (GPOs) in order to identify sales opportunities and new markets.
“This is an important strategic move for us,” said Jason Krantz, CEO of Definitive Healthcare.  Users of each product will gain access to the other, strengthening the ability to research and analyze healthcare organizations across the continuum of care.
“This acquisition not only strengthens our product offering with The MAX’s supply chain expertise, but also helps to solidify our position in the fast-growing market of healthcare provider intelligence,” Krantz continued.
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Pancreatic Cancer is Target of New Precision Medicine Grants
“The combination of the Max and Definitive Healthcare will create the premiere database of hospitals, IDNs, physicians and other healthcare providers.   Together we will have the most accurate, in-depth and integrated data on healthcare providers and will continue to provide our clients with a critical competitive advantage in the marketplace.”
“We are pleased to become part of the Definitive Healthcare team,” added John Pritchard, Managing Director at MDSI. “We aligned with Definitive Healthcare because they not only have the highest quality data, but also cover every single aspect of the healthcare market from hospitals and physicians to accountable care organizations and population health initiatives.”
“The breadth and quality of data they provide is truly unmatched in the marketplace. As part of Definitive we will be able to continue to grow and excel in this critical marketplace.”
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsClinical Analytics


