$500K Grant to Support Healthcare Big Data Analytics Research

May 08, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 08, 2015 - A cross-country healthcare big data analytics research program headed by Virginia Commonwealth University and funded by a $500,000 planning grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation will help to bolster population health management in the San Diego area.   
Big data experts at the California-San Diego Qualcomm Institute will work with members of the VCU Center on Society and Health to support the Live Well San Diego initiative, a community-based wellness project that encourages healthier lifestyle choices for area residents.  Researchers will also delve into the socioeconomic and biological factors that influence the prevalence of chronic diseases and other health concerns. 
“Other industries are putting advanced analytics to work, and we’re excited to show how public health can do the same,” said Steven Woolf, MD, the project’s principal investigator and director of the VCU Center on Society and Health.
“San Diego County is the perfect place to test the use of big data in improving population health. They have more than 100 partner organizations committed to improving the health and safety of the community and are eager to see how big data can help improve their decisions.”
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
Machine Learning Identifies Ovarian Cancer with 91% Accuracy
IBM Watson Gets SNOMED CT Infusion to Enhance Data Analytics
The San Diego County Health and Human Services Agency will also work with local organizations and community entities to develop scalable models for population health management based on the collaboration’s work.
“We know there are gaps in how big-picture, regional data are used to inform the policies and practices at the provider level,” added Nick Macchione, director of the San Diego County Health and Human Services Agency.
“This highly innovative partnership is not only going to close that gap in San Diego County, but provide a roadmap for other regions across the country to create a culture of health. It’s a galactic amount of data that we will harmonize to better humanize what we do in helping the general public to live well.”
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


