One Week of ICD-10: Docs Grumble, Vendors Relax, Payers Scramble

October 09, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 09, 2015 - Is ICD-10 a success so far?  It depends on who you ask.  As the healthcare industry closes out its first full business week under the new code set, anecdotal evidence and preliminary claims data suggest little more than what most stakeholders anticipated: physicians are deeply unhappy, most technical systems have not imploded, and payers are having a tough time adjusting to their new reality under the complex code set.
While most healthcare organizations are still waiting to collect enough revenue cycle data to make an informed judgement on ICD-10’s financial impacts, claims are already being processed and paid – and physicians, administrative staff, and patients are already feeling the pinch from a lack of preparation or the shortcomings of their business partners.
Who is feeling the worst pain from ICD-10, and why?  A series of early polls, announcements, and assessments are helping to paint a picture of the code set’s immediate impacts on productivity and payment.
It’s no surprise that physicians are already voicing their disappointment and frustration with the workflow changes that come with ICD-10.  The need for clinical documentation improvement to meet increased requirements for detail and specificity has been a central feature of the preparation period, and one of the most difficult tasks to accomplish sufficiently.  
Physician resistance to ICD-10, backed by the political muscle of the American Medical Association (AMA) for many years, was instrumental in securing delay after delay – and many small providers who claimed they could not afford the financial burden of the new code set on top of meaningful use and other mandates took the opportunity to push off preparation and technological investment as long as possible.
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
A new SERMO poll indicates that they are now feeling the burn from those decisions.  Out of two hundred physicians surveyed by the social media network, 86 percent said that ICD-10 has impacted patient care, according to results emailed to journalists. 
“I recently saw a young man as a follow up from a car accident,” said one pediatrician. “Under the old ICD-9, I would type ‘motor vehicle,’ and get the choices ‘passenger’ and ‘driver.’ With ICD-10, I typed ‘motor vehicle,’ and the first 20 choices were 3 wheeled vehicles and all different descriptions. I took a couple of minutes to find the right code. All the time taken from the patient. A real waste and no improvement in quality of care.”
While that sounds much more like a failure to familiarize and optimize technology that meets the practice’s needs instead of an inherent flaw in ICD-10, other providers added that ICD-10 required extra time to navigate and forced physicians to see fewer patients each day to compensate for the productivity losses.
In contrast, a brief Practice Fusion user survey struck a much more positive tone.  Only 17 percent of the company’s customers reported that ICD-10 was “very disruptive” to their practice so far, despite the fact that 61 percent of providers felt unsure about their ability to make the transition before October 1.
Over the past week, the cloud-based system has recorded one million patient encounters that had to be coded in ICD-10, with the most common codes including essential (primary) hypertension (I10), type 2 diabetes mellitus without complications (E11.9), hyperlipidemia, unspecified (E78.5), low back pain (M54.5), and anxiety disorder, unspecified (F41.9),” the company said in a press release.
READ MORE: Data Integrity Strategies for Patient Matching, Identification
Practice Fusion, and a few other EHR vendors, are breathing easy after the cutover date.  As late as June, a quarter of vendors could not confirm their product readiness, according to a WEDI poll, but those vendors that were able to get their upgrades into the marketplace seem to have had little trouble with the switch so far.
"Cloud-based technology is exactly what the doctor ordered for a big change like ICD-10," said Tom Langan, CEO of Practice Fusion. "Thanks to our web-based platform, Practice Fusion was able to update all our medical practices with the ICD-10 system with minimal disruption. We are proud to have helped community medicine doctors across the country save thousands of dollars and hundreds of hours of work while embracing this modern coding system."
"We are very pleased to already have claims, with ICD-10 codes included, being paid by multiple payers," said Matt Harrison, MBA, Practice Administrator for Griner Medical Group in Valdosta, GA, which uses an EHR system from Azalea Health. "With Azalea, the transition over to ICD-10 has thankfully been a smooth process for our practice. We are grateful for Azalea's revenue cycle performance support as well as dedication to their customers' success and overall financial health."
Vendors may feel that they are out of the woods, but the agitation is just starting for payers.  SERMO physicians have reported long hold times and helpless shrugs in response to questions, closures for technical upgrades, billing delays, and even one payer who could not accept ICD-10 codes at all.
While these hiccups and delays are certainly frustrating for providers, they do not make payers particularly happy, either, said Erik Newlin, Vice President of National Standards Consulting at Xerox.
READ MORE: Healthcare Artificial Intelligence, Cognitive Tools Bring Big Investments
“There is definitely going to be an increase in demand for call center activity, and it may take several cycles of communication for issues to be resolved,” he told HealthITAnalytics.com.  “Providers are going to need to be as well prepared as they can, and they have to understand that there are a lot of other people competing for attention and time.”
“The better prepared they are, the more quickly things get done.  I know of no one I’ve ever worked with who has the intention not to give good service.  They want to provide expedient and correct service.  A little bit of patience and understanding can go a long way towards working through issues quickly.”
Medicare has stated that it is carefully monitoring its systems for signs of trouble, and has offered providers the chance to report any issues to the ICD-10 Coordination Center by emailing icd10@cms.hhs.gov, or to contact Dr. Bill Rogers, the ICD-10 Ombudsman, for impartial advocacy and advice.
It will still take several weeks for Medicare and many other private payers to collect the first data on the success and denial rates for provider claims, but in the meantime, providers shouldn’t lose sight of why ICD-10 may produce ultimate benefits for patient care and more granular reporting on serious accidents, complications, and rare diseases – even though it seems like some of the more fanciful codes are just unnecessary clutter.
“There’s a little fun involved in some of the codes that seem really out there, and I don’t mind that the media is lambasting a few of them,” Newlin acknowledged.  “I just hope the industry doesn’t lose sight of the benefit that these codes can provide, even if they seem a little preposterous.”
“One of the codes that people are laughing at is the possibility of being sucked through a jet engine.  When I was in the military, I’ve actually seen the event they’re making fun of.  Twice.  So it does happen.  There’s proof positive that there are reasons why these codes have been developed.”
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


