Clinical Analytics Tool Examines Infant Mortality in Indiana

February 11, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 11, 2015 - The state of Indiana is working to leverage predictive clinical analytics to target high risk births and reduce infant mortality among certain identifiable sub-populations, according to a report by KSM Consulting.  By using machine learning to analyze data sets generated from public health sources, Medicaid claims, and state agencies, researchers were able to highlight Medicaid status, maternal age, and the use of pre-natal care as three significant risk categories for infant deaths.
Researchers from Indiana’s offices of technology and management and budget, in conjunction with the governor’s office, examined seventeen public and private data sources that contained demographic information, healthcare utilization, Medicaid status, and other variables to calculate a risk score for birth outcomes.  While some common causes of death, including sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), maltreatment, and co-sleeping asphyxiations showed no clear correlations with the data, the strongest trends were seen with the age and Medicaid status of the mother, as well as how often she received routine pre-natal care.
Young mothers between the ages of 15 and 20 were most likely to depend on Medicaid for their healthcare, and were also most likely to receive fewer than ten pre-natal care visits.  Among Medicaid patients, the risk of infant mortality was 7.16 deaths per 1000 live births, according to data from 2012 through 2014, while non-Medicaid patients experienced only 4.19 deaths per 1000 births.  Approximately half of all births in Indiana are Medicaid eligible or funded.
Patients in the highest risk subpopulations identified by the clinical analytics algorithms accounted for just 1.6% of the population, yet they experience half of all infant deaths.  Approximately 60% of low birth weight infants that survive their first days are born to Medicaid patients.  While these infants only comprise 5% of births, they consume more than one-third of all Medicaid costs related to infant care.  Low birth weight infants are typically born to the same population of young mothers with little regular contact with prenatal care, the study found.
Dig Deeper
Open Population Health Analytics Flag Philly Health Disparities
IBM Watson, Siemens Partner for Population Health Management
Humana Pins Social Determinants of Health to Better Quality of Life
With the help of the clinical analytics tool developed by KSM for use on this project, “analysts now have a way to look at things in rigorously defined ‘buckets,’ each of which provides valuable information about at-risk subpopulations,” the report explains. “Inferences about causal relationships between characteristics of the individual and the subpopulation to which the individual belongs can be made with much more statistical validity than before. Researchers are now empowered to learn about trends over time and rigorously examine the efficacy of programs.”
The model allows researchers to correlate the clinical outcomes data with geographic information that can pinpoint high risk areas on a ZIP code level.  This allows healthcare providers to target interventions to the patient populations most in need of more robust prenatal care.
“Furthermore, the tool’s predictive power can grow as one defines new parameters: the model easily allows researchers to iterate by adding additional, relevant information over time,” the report explains. “One could identify trends over time, understand the effects of a new program, and/or identify new high-risk sub-populations.”
“Researchers using the tool can also create a subset of interest beforehand (Medicaid only, certain age group, certain county, etc.) and then the algorithm will group sub-populations of that subset into distinct high risk buckets. For example, currently the risk profile of women on Medicaid is significantly different than the population at large. In sum, even the risk tool itself goes beyond a generic approach, as changing population inputs allow future users to address specific research questions.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligencePopulation Health Management


