NJ invests in chronic disease, population health management

July 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 03, 2014 - The New Jersey Department of Health has granted $415,000 to the Trenton Health Team (THT) in order to develop a clinical decision support (CDS) and population health management program to serve diabetic and hypertensive patients throughout the region.  The Health Team, a partnership between Trenton’s two hospitals, will attempt to use clinical analytics, individualized care alerts, and CDS to reduce unnecessary emergency room use, cut readmissions, and help patients achieve optimal health while living with chronic diseases.
“This initiative aims to combine the power of data, clinical intervention and the coordination of community providers to improve patient health,” said State Health Commissioner Mary O’Dowd. “Through this effort, all members of the Trenton Health Team-hospitals, federally qualified health centers, local public health agencies and others, have the information they need to make sound decisions and take appropriate action that leads to improved health outcomes.”
Using the one-year grant, St. Francis Medical Center and Capital Health Regional Medical Center will collaborate to analyze their current patterns of care, stratify at-risk patients, and develop care process improvements to help both facilities address issues n a timely and efficient manner, boosted by patient data crossing through the Trenton Health Information Exchange, also developed by THT.
“We’re initially focusing on two chronic diseases that occur at alarmingly high rates within our geography — diabetes and hypertension. Beyond that important goal, in the long run we should end up with a blueprint for expanding the Clinical Decision Support system to include other diseases, which will strengthen our ability to improve the overall health of people in Trenton,” said Dr. Ruth Perry, executive director of the THT.
Dig Deeper
How Do Population Health, Public Health, Community Health Differ?
QIO Program Boosts Medicare Care Coordination, Patient Safety
Data Analytics, Agile Implementation Speed Healthcare Quality Improvement
“Suppose a patient with diabetes and hypertension is admitted to a Trenton hospital with high blood sugar and a foot infection, requiring several different treatments,” she said. “The CDS system will improve our clinical ability to prioritize those treatments, ensure the correct medications are prescribed and better understand what is happening in the life of the patient between medical visits and how that may be impacting the disease process. This enables the clinician to leverage the best information available for decisions about care.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementClinical Decision SupportPopulation Health Management


