Ore. Accountable Care Organizations Continue to Boost Quality

June 25, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 25, 2015 - Oregon’s network of sixteen coordinated care organizations (CCOs), similar to accountable care organizations springing up across the nation, are continuing their steady march towards improved quality and cost savings, the Oregon Health Authority’s latest measurement report reveals. 
Thirteen out of the sixteen participating organizations earned back all of their available quality-based financial bonuses in 2014, the report states, while the remaining three CCOs made measurable progress on at least some of the required clinical quality measures.
Oregon launched its version of accountable care organizations in 2012, and the program has seen significant success each year since its inception.  “Overall, and for the second straight calendar year, the coordinated care model continues to show improvements in a number of areas of care, even with the inclusion of the more than 434,000 additional Oregonians who have enrolled in the Oregon Health Plan since January 1, 2014,” the report says. Approximately 1.1 million patients are currently enrolled in the state’s Medicaid program.
Despite the influx of patients, the CCOs have demonstrated resilience and progress.  The program withholds three percent of reimbursement for expenditures and places the funds into a communal “quality pool,” explained Lori Coyner, Director of Health Analytics at the Oregon Health Authority, to HealthITAnalytics.com earlier in 2015.  “Each of the CCOs are paid out of that pool based on their performance on 17 incentive measures,” she said.
The most recent report, the latest of six summaries released so far, shows that the financial motivation has helped motivate the CCOs towards continually improving their performance.  Notable achievements include:
READ MORE: Real-Time Scheduling Data Helps BIDCO Manage Population Health
• Emergency department visits have decreased by 22 percent based on initial data from 2011.  The CCOs are using technology-driven care coordination techniques such as “referrals to a patient-centered primary care home for members who do not have a primary care provider, as well as referrals to dental services, drug and alcohol services, and intensive management for members that have had 3 or more ED visits in the last 6 months,” the brief states.
• Hospital admissions for short-term complications for diabetes are down nearly 27 percent since 2011.  Admissions for adults who had previous hospital stays related to COPD or asthma have been reduced by 60 percent over the past four years.  All-cause readmissions have decreased from 12.9 percent in 2011 to 11.4 percent in 2014, approaching the ideal state benchmark of 10.5 percent.
• Enrollment in patient-centered medical homes (PCMHs) has more than doubled since 2011.  Eighty-one percent of CCO members are now enrolled in a recognized PCMH.  Primary care costs may be trending upward, but the report believes that the increase simply indicates that more appropriate services are taking place in the ambulatory setting.
• The thirteen CCOs that met their clinical quality reporting requirements earned back up to 5 percent more funds than they contributed to the financial quality pool after meeting additional “challenge pool” metrics related to chronic disease management and population health management tasks.
• Chronic disease management activities, including hypertension control, made incremental progress.  More than 64 percent of adults achieved control of their high blood pressure in 2014, exceeding state benchmarks.  Hemoglobin A1C testing has increased from 78.5 percent to 80.8 percent over the timeframe.  Only 21 percent of diabetic patients ranked as “poorly controlled” in 2014.
READ MORE: ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
The success of accountable care structures like those in Oregon is based on a strong data analytics infrastructure, Coyner said.  EHR adoption has increased from 28 percent of eligible providers in 2011 to 67.7 percent of organizations in 2014, hovering just under the 72 percent goal set by the state, and many of the CCOs are participating in a number of big data analytics activities promoted by the Oregon Health Authority.
“We’re building a clinical data repository so that eventually, when the CCOs submit their clinical data, it will come directly there,” she said in February. “There is also some health information exchange (HIE) coming online. There’s one that serves the southern part of Oregon, and multiple CCOs are connected there. So we have been tracking what sort of health information technology is happening.”
“One of the key pieces is that we actually provide data to the CCOs through a portal on a monthly basis. So they see this information a lot more often than we report publicly. We track and monitor the measures so that we know where our transformations are being effective, and how we can provide learning collaboratives and other resources for some of the metrics where the CCOs aren’t continuing to show improvement.”
CCOs that have also achieved patient-centered medical home recognition are encouraged to coordinate care and continue the upward trend of primary care service utilization by proactively connecting with newly attributed patients, Coyner added. 
“We know that many of the CCOs, when a new member was enrolled, would contact the member and make them aware of who their primary care team is,” she said. “We believe that that early connection with primary care probably allowed new members to start going directly to their primary care home and not just to the emergency department because they didn’t know where to go.”
READ MORE: Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
The 2014 report also indicated an overall rise in health status among adults and children alike.  Based on Medicaid CAHPS scores, “good health” status rose by more than ten percent for adults since the start of the CCO program, and already-high levels for children increased by nearly two percent during the same time period.
Patient satisfaction with care has also measurably increased, with consumers reporting that they are receiving adequate information for decision making while being treated with courtesy and respect.  Coupled with the marked improvement in clinical quality measures, the state’s CCO initiative seems to be a successful model for accountable care organizations across the nation to follow.
Tagged Accountable Care OrganizationsAnalytics InfrastructurePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


