PCDC Celebrates Aiding Its 200th Patient-Centered Medical Home

March 30, 2016

By Jacqueline LaPointe
March 30, 2016 - Two hundred primary care practices have earned the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) patient-centered medical home (PCMH) recognition with the help of the non-profit Primary Care Development Corporation, according to a recent press release.
As healthcare reimbursement transitions to value-based payment models, primary care practices are increasingly focusing on providing high-quality care at an affordable price. The patient-centered medical home model helps primary care physicians provide patient-centered care with long-term savings.
In 2010, PCDC created a PCMH support team to assist healthcare providers in the US with earning NCQA PCMH recognition.
“PCDC’s mission is to ensure access to quality primary care for every family in every community,” PCDC CEO Louise Cohen said. “The medical home model is widely accepted as how primary care should be organized and delivered – and I am proud that we have now helped 200 practices provide more coordinated, patient-centered care to hundreds of thousands of patients.”
Dig Deeper
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
NCQA Revamps Patient-Centered Medical Home to Ease Adoption
Patient-Centered Medical Home Has Saved Payer $1.2B Since 2011
Healthcare providers are evaluated on the tenets of the PCMH, including patient-centered care, team-based care methods, population health management, personal care management, care coordination, and consistent quality care. PCDC fosters healthcare programs in primary care practices that uphold these core values.
The press release highlights the two most recent practices to earn the highest level of PCMH recognition. The New York practices are part of Mount Sinai Doctors Faculty Practice.
As part of their transformation efforts, the practices implemented real-time alerts for unplanned emergency department and hospital admissions.  They also connected patients to community-based resources and social services.
PCDC helped the practices to concentrate on post-discharge monitoring and primary care support for frequent patients of the emergency department.
“The medical home model is essential to Mount Sinai’s strategy of transforming how healthcare is delivered in the communities we serve,” said Burton Brayer, MD,  CEO of Mount Sinai Doctors Faculty Practice and Dean for Clinical Affairs at the Icahn School of Medicine.. “PCDC’s leadership and expertise has helped us strengthen our practices, and we are delighted that a Mount Sinai faculty practice is PCDC’s 200th successful NCQA PCMH recognition.”
Tagged Care CoordinationPatient Centered Medical HomePopulation Health Management


