CMS Seeks Comments on Merit-Based Incentive Payment System

October 16, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 16, 2015 - Healthcare stakeholders who need a little more time to gather their thoughts about the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) may take advantage of an extended comment period, CMS said in a document slated for publication in the Federal Register next week. 
In response to requests from industry leaders asking for additional opportunities to comment on the proposals, CMS has agreed to give respondents an extra fifteen days to submit their remarks on questions presented October 1.  The comment period now closes on November 17, 2015.
The MIPS framework, introduced in April when Congress passed the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA), which repealed the reviled SGR calculation and proposed major changes to the future of the EHR Incentive Programs and associated quality reporting requirements.
Scheduled to begin in 2019, MIPS will combine three of the industry’s major quality reporting initiatives, including meaningful use, the Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS), and the Value-Based Modifier (VBM) into a single pay-for-performance attestation program. 
Dig Deeper
Can Point-of-Care Analytics Change the Healthcare Equation?
National Health IT Week Brings Celebration, Educational Events
Bridging the Gap Between Big Data Science, Health IT Usability
Eligible professionals (EPs) participating in the system’s alternative payment models (APMs) will be eligible for a series of bonuses determined by composite performance scores, furthering CMS’ interest in shifting the bulk of Medicare payments to value-based reimbursement.
The October 1 request for information asked providers and other stakeholders to consider a large number of questions, including some of the following:
• How should CMS define what constitutes an “eligible professional?”  Should providers be able to form attestation groups that would make it easier for smaller practices to participate?  What methodologies should be used to determine whether a provider is a full-scale participant in an alternative payment model or just a partial qualifier?
• What specific criteria could be used to determine “comparability” of EAPM quality measures to MIPS?
• How can CMS define what services are and are not delivered under an eligible alternative payment model (EAPM) entity?  How should CMS measure “appropriate levels of financial risk” under these models?
• How can Medicaid medical home models be compared to other patient-centered practice design frameworks?  What criteria should be considered for this comparison?
• How should CMS define the “use of EHR technology” by APM participants?  Should APM participants be required to report quality measures to all payers using ONC certified EHR technology (CEHRT), or only use CEHRT for payers who require EHR-reported metrics?
Stakeholders have been somewhat overwhelmed with hefty documents chronicling changes to the EHR Incentive Programs over the next few years, and may still be focusing most of their attention on advocating for a delay to Stage 3 meaningful use, which may in turn push back implementation of the MIPS proposals.
While a final flexibility rule released on October 6 gave providers a small taste of the relief they have been looking for between now and 2017, the general consensus presented by lawmakers and professional societies is that the flexibility provisions do not go nearly far enough to make meaningful use manageable for beleaguered organizations.
Some providers may feel that it is premature to be digging into the details of a system not planned to take effect until close to the end of the decade before resolving the controversy around Stage 2 and Stage 3.  But the fact that CMS is allowing early and extensive public comment on the future of its reimbursement plans indicates that the agency may be looking to correct past mistakes by listening more closely to stakeholder feedback during the initial stages of the design process.
Parties interested in commenting on the MIPS questionnaire may submit their remarks online or see the pre-publication PDF for details on regular mail or other delivery methods.
Tagged Accountable CareHealthcare Data GovernanceMeaningful UseValue Based Payments


