Women on oral birth control are 35% more likely to develop MS

March 10, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 10, 2014 - A concerning new study from the EHR data banks of the Kaiser Permanente system links oral contraceptive use with a significantly increased chance of developing multiple sclerosis, says post-doctoral research fellow Kerstin Hellwig, MD.  Women who used a birth control pill containing an estrogen/progestin combination for at least three months were 35% more likely than other women to exhibit MS or CIS symptoms within three years.
“Independent of age, smoking status, parity and obesity, there was a link between the use of oral contraceptives and the development of the first symptoms of MS,” Hellwig explained.  “These findings suggest that using hormonal contraceptives may be contributing at least in part to the rise in the rate of MS among women.”
The study gathered data from the EHRs of 305 women diagnosed with MS or CIS between 2008 and 2011 who had at least three previous years of membership within the Kaiser Permanente system in order to collect a complete, contiguous record of their health status.  Each case was compared to ten controls.  In the MS group, 29.2% of women had used a hormone contraceptive prior to diagnosis, compared to 23.5% of the control group, correlating to a 35% higher risk of developing the disease.  Women who stopped taking contraceptives just one month prior to diagnosis had a 50% higher risk, Hellwig added.
Hellwig notes that the study is too small to change the recommendations of healthcare professionals in relation to birth control subscriptions, but she also adds that two similar studies have come to the same conclusion.  “This is just one more small part of the puzzle,” she told Medscape Medical News, adding to research on a disease that is increasingly being linked to hormonal fluctuations in women. “Hormones play an important role in many diseases, and it is known that pregnancy, which is associated with high estrogen levels, is protective against relapses in women who already have MS, so hormones appear to be involved in some way in this disease,” she said.
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
CancerLinQ Brings Big Data Insights to Oncology with FDA, NCI Partners
The research is the latest in a series of studies produced by the Kaiser Permanente system, whose comprehensive health IT suite provides a wealth of long-term data to parse.  Other researchers have recently found associations between obesity and hypertension in pediatric patients, and noted that clinical data analytics combined with EHR alerts can help increase screenings for aortic aneurisms, which are often fatal.  Hellwig will be presenting more details on her project at the American Academy of Neurology Annual Meeting at the end of April.
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient CareQuality Of Care


