ICD-10 Implementation is Just the Beginning for Coder Education

September 29, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 29, 2015 - NEW ORLEANS - October 1, 2015 is etched into the consciousness of health information management professionals as the day when ICD-10 finally becomes a reality, but anyone who thinks that the hard work will be over once the first ICD-10 claim goes out the door is mistaken.
The first day of October may be the end of ICD-9, but it’s just the beginning of ICD-10, Thea Campbell, MBA, RHIA, Director of Health Information at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center reminded attendees of the AHIMA 2015 Convention.  
Healthcare organizations will have to continually invest in education, training, and auditing for their coders if they wish to maintain their revenue cycles and avoid disruptions for HIM staff, physicians, and the organization as a whole.
“CMS has set October 1 as the deadline for compliance with ICD-10, but our experience has taught us that initial implementation is just the start of a successful transition to the new code set,” Campbell said in a press release to complement a Monday educational session.  The large California-based health system has spent the past four years actively preparing for the ICD-10 transition, despite being stymied again and again by legislative delays.
“We’ve been preparing for ICD-10 forever,” she said, outlining the system’s long-term preparation plans.  Cedars-Sinai completed its first impact assessments and established its ICD-10 steering committee in 2011.  In 2012, coders completed approximately 180 hours of ICD-10 education in preparation for an October transition date.  The first of several delays did not deter the health system: they continued to conduct payer testing, assess their financial and contractual obligations, and enrolled in the WEDI National Pilot Program.
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
The health system hired trainers and started dual coding 100 percent of its claims in 2013, Campbell continued.  When the 2014 delay dampened enthusiasm across the industry, Cedars-Sinai took the breathing room as an opportunity to implement its computer assisted coding (CAC) tools and focus on clinical documentation improvement (CDI) for its physicians.
A sense of urgency began to build again in 2015, as the likelihood of another freeze diminished, and Campbell’s 50-strong coding team started to focus on earnest on what ICD-10 implementation would really mean for their daily workflows.
“ICD-10 levels the playing field,” said Campbell.  “Gone are the days of being able to say, ‘I have 30 years of coding experience.’  Starting on October 1, we all have one day of coding experience.”
This is both an opportunity and a challenge for HIM professionals, she added. Even veteran coders are likely to struggle with ICD-10 at the beginning.  “Initial training will give them the knowledge to start coding in ICD-10, but only hands-on experience and educational feedback will give them the expertise to reach pre-implementation levels of productivity and accuracy,” Campbell said.  
“We continue to want to be invested in training.  Some of that has to be very individualized.  If you know how one coder works in ICD-10, you only know how one coder works in ICD-10,” she added.  “Making education available so a coder can get continual feedback is very important.”
READ MORE: The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
That education should be tailored to each coder’s weak spots, which will allow organizations to target their resources most appropriately.  “It’s very important that if you’re going to get in front of your coders, make it very specific,” suggested co-presenter Thomas Ormondroyd, BS, MBA, Vice President and General Manager of Precyse Learning Solutions. 
“For example, interpreting the right code for documentation related to ‘underdosing’ may be a significant issue, but I don’t want to waste a coder’s time doing two hours of education about other chapters - I just want them to brush up on underdosing," he said.  "You don’t want to have everybody take one big course that not everyone needs.”
Cedars-Sinai has developed a comprehensive plan for ensuring that their coders are working up to their fullest potential without letting an unacceptable amount of revenue slip through the cracks. Coder audits keep tabs on productivity levels and accuracy, which can keep hundreds of thousands of dollars flowing into the system.
“If you think this is just an HIM problem, you’re kidding yourself,” Ormondroyd said.  “This is a revenue cycle problem.  You have to make sure that you’re supporting the organization, because otherwise you’re going to be facing some major challenges.  We’re talking serious money.”
“Don’t wait until you start to get coding denials before you audit your coders,” Campbell warned. “It’s important to proactively identify errors and take steps to correct them as they occur.”
READ MORE: The Top 3 Planning Pain Points in Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Using audit data to establish baselines and pinpoint problem areas, Cedars-Sinai is planning to keep coders on track by implementing a phased approach to monitoring after the implementation date.  Coders unable to reach accuracy levels of 95 percent will be asked to undergo additional targeted education.  They will have between 30 and 45 days to reach acceptable accuracy levels before being audited again.
If the coder does not meet expectations, they will receive individualized coaching from a trainer, additional review, and a discussion about their potential issues.  After that, a warning about their future at the organization and the potential that they are putting their employment in jeopardy.
While this might seem like a hardline approach, “you have to make sure your coders are not presenting an organizational risk,” Campbell said.
Healthcare organizations should ensure that educational resources are available for their coders long past the October 1, 2015 ICD-10 implementation date.  Cedars-Sinai will continue to invest in education and training at pre-implementation levels for at least six months after the deadline, and has already signed long-term contracts to keep some of their training going for several years.
This ongoing workforce development will hopefully reap significant dividends from both experienced coders and those just entering the profession, Campbell said.  While newly graduated coders may not have the same real-world experience as more mature professionals, the new environment presents healthcare organizations with an opportunity to secure a flush of new talent without having to rely on poaching experienced coders from rival organizations.
“Traditionally, we’ve been hesitant to hire coders who have completed their education but have no previous experience,” she acknowledged. “Take advantage of the training programs already in place for ICD-10 to recruit coders without real-world experience, train them and move them along a career ladder that will build loyalty and reduce turnover.”
Tagged AHIMA 2015Healthcare Data GovernanceHealthcare Data StrategyICD-10


