39M Medicare Patients Received Free Preventative Care in 2014

February 24, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 24, 2015 - Thirty-nine million Medicare and Medicare Advantage beneficiaries received at least one preventative care service with no cost sharing in 2014 as a produce of the Affordable Care Act, HHS said in a press release today.  As population health management programs begin to reap benefits for patients and healthcare providers, the use of preventative care, including annual wellness exams and screenings, is growing at a respectable rate.  At the same time, HHS announced that 9.4 million beneficiaries have saved $15 billion in prescription drug costs since 2010, highlighting the impact of complementary reforms that increase care access for needy patients.
“Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, seniors and people with disabilities have saved over $15 billion on prescription drugs, and these savings will only increase over time as we close the Medicare coverage gap known as the donut hole,” said HHS Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell. “By providing access to affordable prescription drugs and preventive services with no cost sharing, the Affordable Care Act is working for seniors to help keep them healthier.”
As part of its ongoing improvement of services, HHS hopes to close the “donut hole,” which requires patients to pay for some of their prescriptions out of pocket before Medicare coverage takes hold, by gradually increasing payment rates, providing rebates, and offering discounts for some generic drugs.  The program began in 2010 with eligible patients receiving a $250 rebate for out-of-pocket costs, and continued with discounts of up to 55 percent for Medicare Part D patients.  In 2014, 5.1 million patients saved an average of $941 per beneficiary through ACA-related prescription drug cost reductions, a significant increase from the $911 that 4.3 million saved in 2013.
The changes are part of the HHS “better care, smarter spending, healthier people” initiative, which encourages Medicare beneficiaries to take advantage of the care coordination and preventative care services offered by providers seeking financial rewards under value-based purchasing and accountable care arrangements.  The Affordable Care Act has made many routine screenings, preventative care, and chronic disease management services free on an annual basis.  These services include screenings for cardiovascular disease, diabetes, depression, some cancers, and HIV.  Diabetes management, weight management, alcohol misuse, and tobacco addition programs are also covered free of cost for Medicare Part B beneficiaries.
Dig Deeper
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
How Do Population Health, Public Health, Community Health Differ?
Penn State, Highmark Health to Spend $1B on Population Health
Overall, nearly three-quarters of eligible Part B beneficiaries have received one or more of these free services in 2014.  More than fourteen percent of patients have benefited from a new annual wellness visit or associated screening during the same time period.
Patients, providers, and payers have all benefitted from the emphasis on preventing the development of chronic diseases in recent years.  Patients are accessing more preventative care services more frequently, researchers have found, and patients with a higher number of chronic conditions are increasingly likely to be up-to-date on their screenings and basic population health management measurements.   A study from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health also found that preventative care has been integral in a 24 percent decline in strokes over the past twenty years thanks to better control of important risk factors such as hypertension and high cholesterol.
The push for prevention ties in with an industry-wide effort to reduce rampant, wasteful spending across the care continuum.  Patients who receive cheaper, routine care at their primary care providers are less likely to experience costly inpatient admissions or emergency department visits.  This, in turn, helps those providers meet patient outcomes goals that dictate their reimbursements.  As the healthcare industry moves towards these accountable care measures at an increasingly rapid pace, preventative care may become even more commonplace as a valuable tool in the fight against chronic disease and extraneous spending.
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


