Data analytics, care coordination vendors raise big bucks in Q1

April 16, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 16, 2014 - Companies offering data analytics, care coordination, and practice management solutions raised more than $850 million dollars in the first quarter of 2014 from venture capital firms interested in funding the next big advancement in health IT.  A report by Mercom Capital Group shows that the first three months of 2014 broke records for funding totals, with a majority of the money headed to companies specializing in data warehousing, real-time software solutions for risk-bearing entities like health plans, and wearable monitoring technologies.
“Funding into the Healthcare IT sector continues at an astonishing pace. Venture capital funding in healthcare IT has reached almost $5 billion in about 1,000 deals since 2010,” said Raj Prabhu, CEO and Co-Founder of Mercom Capital Group.  The first quarter of 2014 topped the previous quarter by 154 percent, pulling in $858 million, which is the highest dollar amount raised by the sector within a single quarter yet.
Practice management was the most popular area for fundraising, with $124 million collected through eight deals, while health information exchange pulled in $78 million between just two deals.  Data analytics came in third with $43 million raised across seven new partnerships, boosted significantly by the $41 million Health Catalyst raised through investments by Kaiser Permanente and Partners HealthCare System, among others.
“As more healthcare organizations are coming to understand, data warehousing and analytics are foundational to their success under new payment and risk models,” said Health Catalyst CEO Dan Burton in January as he announced that his company had secured nearly $100 million in funding overall.  “This additional capital will enable Health Catalyst to develop the applications necessary to offer every health system in the US a roadmap to systematically reduce waste and improve care delivery, across every major clinical and workflow area.”
Dig Deeper
Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
Financial Big Data Analytics Woes Plague Healthcare Providers, Payers
Revenue Cycle Analytics Enable Value-Based Care for Pediatrics Group
Other notable events in the venture capital market during the winter of 2014 include $77.5 million raised by MedHOK, a provider of quality and compliance software platforms for health plans and benefits organizations, and $41.4 million secured by MINDBODY, which produces business management software for health and wellness companies.  Initial public offerings (IPO) for Castlight Health and Everyday Health, providers of healthcare transparency and digital wellness solutions, respectively, cashed in at a combined $304 million.
There was also a brisk trade in acquisitions, with healthcare cost management company MultiPlan acquired by Starr Investment Holdings for $4.4 billion and Intel Corporation scooping up wearable device developer Basis Science for close to $100 million.  Other acquisitions involved online compliance training and patient experience companies, surgical scheduling management vendors, and specialty EHR vendors.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureFinancial AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data Analytics


