FHIR, Big Data to Support FDA Medical Device Development Network

September 23, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 23, 2016 - Emerging standards that support the seamless flow of big data across multiple entities, such as FHIR, will form the foundation of the FDA’s planned National Evaluation System for health Technology (NEST), states a new report from the project’s planning board. 
By building an interoperable network from the ground up, the FDA hopes to create a more streamlined, safety-conscious process for medical device development that integrates big data from the clinical setting, as well as input from payers, patients, device registries, adverse event databanks, and manufacturers.
The FDA’s role in the medical device community has sometimes been a matter of contention.  Developers have responded quickly to the healthcare system’s increasing emphasis on patient engagement and chronic disease management by offering a torrent of new devices, mHealth apps, and other tools to help patients address their daily needs.
But FDA regulations have not always moved as speedily as the market, leaving vendors with unanswered questions about what devices must be regulated, how to navigate the complicated approval process, and how to ensure the safety of their offerings while still capitalizing on consumer demand.
Lax post-market monitoring, along with difficulties in collecting and analyzing patient safety data from the clinical side, have led the FDA to investigate new methodologies for collecting medical device data and flagging worrisome outcomes without hamstringing vendors.
READ MORE: ONC Picks FHIR Health Data Aggregation App Contest Winners
NEST hopes to reduce the tension between speed and safety in the medical device development process by making it easier to integrate real-world evidence into the testing and post-market monitoring of tools used to diagnose and treat a wide variety of diseases, FDA officials said.
“Ensuring safety, expediting patient access, and enabling innovation can be complementary goals within a regulatory framework for medical devices,” asserted FDA Commissioner Robert Califf, MD and Jeffrey Shuren, MD, JD, Director of the Center for Devices and Radiological Health, in a viewpoint article published in JAMA this summer.
Since 2012, the FDA has been working on creating a nationwide data sharing network that could “quickly identify problematic devices, accurately and transparently characterize and disseminate information about device performance in clinical practice, and effectively generate data to support pre-market clearance or approval of new devices and new users of currently marketed devices,” Califf and Shuren added.
NEST will meet those needs by bringing together a network of consumer, provider, payer, and vendor stakeholders who will share resources, supported by a central Coordinating Center and informed by expert advisory committees.
“When fully operational, the core of the NEST will be an interoperable network of data partners,” explained the planning board, based at the Duke University Margolis Center for Health Policy.
READ MORE: Big Data, Interoperability Top Black Book’s Trends for 2017
“This voluntary network will initially be created through standardized data sharing agreements. It is envisioned that the Coordinating Center will begin with a limited set of partners and expand as the governance policies and program processes are established.”
Access to electronic health record data alone will not be enough to create a robust and efficient patient safety tool, Califf and Shuren said.  The Coordinating Center overseeing NEST must establish common definitions and core data sets that can be applied to multiple medical device development use cases while being able to automatically collect and extract data from the clinical workflow and elsewhere without overwhelming users with reporting requirements.
Along with health systems and the device industry, early partners will include the FDA’s Sentinel project, PCORnet, registry networks, the National Center for Health Statistics, patient advocacy groups, and claims data systems.
“The Coordinating Center should work with communities of experts to support the development of a NEST clearinghouse of analytical tools, methods, and standards for using linked real-world data collected through clinical and administrative workflows as well as from patients themselves to evaluate devices,” the panel recommends.
These analytics tools should be based on data standards achieving widespread acceptance, such as the Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resource (FHIR), which has shown great promise for vendors across the healthcare industry seeking to leapfrog the data siloes and formatting issues that prevent organizations from communicating effectively.
READ MORE: How Do Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning Differ in Healthcare?
“Important developments in standardized electronic health information and improved interoperability have been undertaken by groups such as ONC and HL7,” notes the planning board.  “The Coordinating Center should seek to partner in the evolution of these efforts, which include building the business case and rules of engagement for sharing medical device information among major stakeholders using FHIR.”
While developing NEST, the Coordinating Center should develop strong, secure data governance policies and “prioritize demonstration projects that connect disparate data sources, and standardize and automate data collection through routine clinical and administrative workflows,” the board suggests.
These steps will allow NEST to develop “a comprehensive strategy focused on building re-usable solutions to meet high-priority needs that support sustainable business cases,” the report continued.
Unique device identifiers (UDIs) will also play a crucial role in the process of creating an industry-wide repository of medical device information.  Manufacturers and levelers are currently required to include UDIs with their products, but the information is not mandatory within the healthcare delivery system.
Regulators are hoping to change this in an effort to provide more patient safety protections around the use of implantable devices and other higher-risk tools.  Expanding the use of UDIs will also make it easier to conduct surveillance within the NEST system and communicate potential issues to healthcare providers and patients more efficiently.
Big data sharing will be a two-way street for NEST users.  The planning board hopes to foster patient engagement and improved safety by encouraging consumers to share outcomes and symptom data with the system in addition to receiving notices and warnings for the tools they use.
“The Coordinating Center should pilot flexible, patient-centered approaches that support effective patient engagement in clinical research while also scaling the ability of major stakeholders to gain responsible access to patient data,” the report says.
These approaches may include a “patient-driven data commons” which will allow patients to choose how their collective data resources are used for research and other applications.  Other projects may build on existing efforts by other organizations, including the Sync for Science pilot intended to encourage patients to contribute data to the Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort.
“This is an exciting and critical time in healthcare, and the Planning Board believes that the emerging electronic healthcare infrastructure can support a collaborative system capable of supporting the development, regulation and use of innovative medical devices,” the report concludes.
“This system has the potential to improve public health and individual patient care by minimizing the time and cost of generating high-quality information on the risk, benefits and overall value of medical devices using real-world data captured through routine care.”
The panel recommends that the Coordinating Center start work on big data sharing and patient engagement demonstration projects as soon as possible to develop best practices for future medical device development, patient safety surveillance, and standards-based interoperability across the healthcare industry.
4 Basics to Know about the Role of FHIR in Interoperability
Why Health Data Interoperability is Setting EHR Vendors on FHIR
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR InteroperabilityFHIRmHealth and the FDAPatient Safety


