New AHA Digital Tool Offers Chronic Disease Screening Services

May 02, 2018

By Jessica Kent
May 02, 2018 - The American Heart Association (AHA) is working to improve community health with its Health Screening Services, which will allow consumers to identify potential chronic disease risks and inspire them to make necessary behavioral and lifestyle changes.
"The new business offering is part of a larger ambitious mission strategy to help create a culture of health and well-being for Americans by increasing awareness of health risks and changing lifestyle behaviors," said John Meiners, the American Heart Association Chief of Mission-Aligned Businesses.
"The most effective workplace health screening models combine health assessment with screening, followed by actionable encouragement to promote behavior change, resulting in higher participation in health and wellness programs."
Dig Deeper
Digital Chronic Disease Management Boosts Diabetes Self-Care
Chronic Disease Management Lowers Heart Failure Hospital Rates
Gaps in Chronic Disease Care Leave Patients, Docs Frustrated
AHA’s Health Screening Services will offer a streamlined experience through a modern appointment scheduling system and interactive online data analytics and reporting. Consumers will receive evidence-based health guidance and effective self-monitoring programs.
These new services will also align with the organization’s mission to address the social determinants of health.
AHA will offer screenings to consumers both in the workplace and at community-based health events to close the wellness gaps that exist among different populations.
Connecting with employers and public health agencies will promote prevention programs in the largest and most impacted segments of the population, as well as address the risk factors that lead to poor health.
"We know that combining screenings with lifestyle and behavior change that takes into account the social determinants of health can result in overall health improvement –not just in the workplace with employees but in communities with the elderly and underserved at large," said Eduardo Sanchez, MD, the American Heart Association Chief Medical Officer for Prevention.
"We are committed to providing realistic solutions to meet the needs of all people, regardless of who they are, where they live, or what they do."
The Health Screening Services combines AHA’s Life’s Simple 7, or the seven best indicators of heart health that people can impact with lifestyle changes, with the importance of knowing your numbers through biometric screenings.
Life’s Simple 7 health behaviors and metrics represent seven of the top 10 most costly risk factors for employers, including smoking, eating habits, and cholesterol levels. Individuals who maintain ideal levels for at least five of the seven measures reduce their risk of heart-related death by more than 50 percent.
Once the health screening is completed, the Association will automatically integrate profile information and lab values into its online health assessment tool, My Life Check Enhance.
Consumers will get a personalized Heart Health Score and dashboard to measure their progress over time. They will also receive health actions that are sequenced and bundled according to individual responses.
Screenings will include both fasting and non-fasting menu options. Participants can choose from several ways to complete their biometric screening, including onsite, diagnostic lab facility, or home test kit.
Health Screening Services will be available for employers and at community-sponsored events as part of a collection of workplace wellness options. 
Tagged AHAChronic Disease ManagementChronic Disease PreventionCommunity health centersDigital Health DevicesSocial determinants of health


