Physicians, Lawmakers Rally to Retool Stage 3 Meaningful Use

December 07, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 07, 2015 - The year may be winding down as the healthcare industry approaches the holidays, but providers, lawmakers, and advocacy groups are not easing up on the pressure to hit the brakes on Stage 3 meaningful use. 
The last step of the EHR Incentive Programs has been the most controversial by far, as healthcare organizations struggle to plan their health IT strategies, wrestle with EHR interoperability, and stretch their budgets to make ends meet before the requirements come into effect in 2017 and 2018.
After failing to convince CMS that publication of the Stage 3 rule should be postponed, Congressmen, CIOs, and clinicians across the country are now pleading with the federal rule makers to enact major changes to the Stage 3 meaningful use timelines and requirements before unleashing the challenging framework onto an unprepared industry.
CMS released the finalized Stage 3 rule on October 6, 2015, the same day that it published substantial modifications to some aspects of Stage 2.  In addition to aligning reporting periods to the calendar year, the modification rule drastically reduced the patient engagement and secure messaging requirements, streamlined certain attestation measures, and allowed more generous exemptions for eligible organizations.
The changes were welcome, but in a late November letter to Speaker of the House Paul Ryan, a coalition of healthcare providers from the GOP Doctors Caucus pointed out the oddity of releasing relaxed Stage 2 guidelines while failing to address concerns about the very challenging regulations of Stage 3. 
READ MORE: The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
The acknowledgement that the “original [Stage 2] criteria were unworkable” should have been paired with a similar nod to overwhelmed physicians facing penalties and problems in Stage 3, the letter says.
“Given the fact that only 12 percent of physicians have met Stage 2 requirements, we believe a simultaneous implementation of more-stringent criteria, along with the assessment of penalties for the first time this year, is likely to create a chilling effect on further EMR adoption as physicians conclude that the cost of implementation is simply not worth the bureaucratic hassle,” the lawmakers predict.
The American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) agrees that changes must be made in order to allow providers to participate in the EHR Incentive Programs.  Meaningful use offers an important path towards achieving the Triple Aim of improved care delivery, lower costs, and better patient outcomes – but not in its current form, argues Board Chair Robert L. Wergin, MD, FAAFP in a letter to HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell.
“Practice transformation is a time-intensive process that touches all aspects of a practice, including quality, safety, patient engagement, and population health management,” Wergin writes. “However, we still have significant concern that this final rule does not allow for continued successful transformation toward the three-part aim, but rather places further obstacles in the path to this goal.”
CMS should pause Stage 3 meaningful use to address industry concerns and allow more room for the healthcare system to cultivate the competencies and technologies required to fully participate in value-based reimbursement programs that may improve care quality.
READ MORE: Tech Giants Give Healthcare Artificial Intelligence Start-Ups a Boost
If CMS agrees to grant providers some breathing room, it will allow the developer community to make further progress on EHR interoperability, address health IT design and usability concerns, focus on practice transformation efforts that will foster value-based reimbursement, and allow rule makers the opportunity to better align meaningful use with upcoming MACRA regulations.
In the years since the passage of the HITECH Act, the industry has advanced far beyond the original vision of the law, Wergin says.  CMS must take advantage of additional “policy levers” that have developed since the start of the EHR Incentive Programs, and must recognize that providers are in a vastly different position than they were in 2009, when meaningful use first spurred them into widespread EHR adoption.
“I believe that the meaningful use programs have served their purpose,” said John Halamka, MD, CIO at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and an outspoken industry advocate.  “Stage 1 created a foundation of functionality for everyone.   That was good.   Stage 2 tried to change too much too fast and required an ecosystem of applications and infrastructure that did not exist.   Stage 3 makes many of the same mistakes as Stage 2, trying to do too much too soon.”
Healthcare organizations simply do not have the underlying infrastructure to cope with the big data analytics, population health management, and health information exchange requirements included in the Stage 3 rule, Halamka says. 
An immature API ecosystem, a lack of system-wide interoperability, and the chronic inability of providers to communicate with external business partners makes it impossible for providers to make the leap to Stage 3, he asserts.
READ MORE: Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
“Clinicians cannot get through a 12 minute visit, enter the necessary Stage 3 data elements, reconcile problems/allergies/medications from multiple institutions, meet the demands of the Stage 3 clinical quality measures, make eye contact with patients, and deliver safe medical care,” Halamka writes.  “There needs to be a new approach.”
The AAFP believes that CMS can reduce the enormous burdens of meaningful use by spreading the load across multiple, smaller initiatives that offer more flexibility and opportunities for incremental change.
“Instead of piling everything in MU, CMS should rebalance the goals and requirements across all value-based programs since the goals of Meaningful Use may have better policy levers outside of Meaningful Use authority to encourage needed changes in the health care system,” Wergin suggests.
“During this rebalance, requirements must be harmonized across the spectrum of regulations governing practice and payment transformation and health information technology.”
Providers replying to the comment period associated with the Stage 3 rule have some suggestions of their own for how CMS can improve the EHR Incentive Programs.  Of utmost concern is the all-or-nothing approach to attestation, physicians said. 
Providers are not rewarded for specific improvements or given any leeway on any individual measures, which makes it extremely difficult to participate.  Providers who do not operate under traditional office- or hospital-based models find it nearly impossible to meet metrics designed for a generalized mode of primary care practice.
Commenters echoed Halamka’s assertions that the technology ecosystem is simply not capable of delivering the interoperability and analytics capabilities required to succeed with Stage 3.  Uneven adoption of health information exchange and other basic technologies across industry segments means that even the most prepared organization could fall short on certain measures due to a lack of readiness from their external partners, which many respondents deemed deeply unfair.
Without more time and support to develop a truly interoperable care continuum, Stage 3 will simply fall flat on its face, opponents believe.  And if CMS fails to heed the tidal wave of backlash from across the industry, lawmakers are ready to take matters into their own hands.
“CMS has pushed forward with its rule in the face of bipartisan, bicameral opposition,” the GOP representatives stated.  “Thus, a legislative remedy is the only way to ensure providers are protested from this deeply flawed Stage 3 rule.  Members of our caucus, as well as numerous Congressional healthcare leaders, have engaged CMS on these issues to warn them of the potential negative consequences of placing these new requirements on providers in order to meet an arbitrary deadline."
"CMS has ignored Congress.  Congressional action is the only solution left for preserving patient access, choice, and quality,” the letter concludes.  “We stand ready to work with [Speaker Ryan] to find an appropriate legislative vehicle to protect patients by addressing CMS’ hasty rulemaking in the meaningful use program.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsMeaningful UseQuality Of Care


