What Are the 5 Key Challenges to Health Data Interoperability?

October 02, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 02, 2015 - Over the past few months, critics of the EHR Incentive Programs have been gathering ammunition for the argument that federal efforts to advance health IT adoption are out of step with the actual state of the industry.  
Demands to pause Stage 3 meaningful use – or even scrap it all together as providers struggle with EHR optimization, population health management, and value-based reimbursement – have intensified dramatically in recent days as frustrated physicians voice their concerns.
EHRs are immature and cumbersome, they say, and providers are reduced to little more than data entry clerks overwhelmed by quality reporting requirements, documentation improvement initiatives related to ICD-10, alarms and alerts that disrupt workflows, and data integrity rules that prevent them from taking arguably necessary time-saving shortcuts.
On top of that, the data they work so hard to create and have such trouble accessing is often incomplete.  Both patients and clinicians complain about inaccurate medication reconciliation, inaccessible test results, and achingly onerous administrative processes that prevent the delivery of personal, attentive, meaningful care.
As burned out clinicians vent their anger on CMS and the ONC, private industry initiatives have rapidly formed to pick up some of the slack. 
READ MORE: Can $10B Solve Healthcare’s Big Data Analytics, Productivity Woes?
Expanding and fine turning the healthcare system’s health data interoperability capabilities won’t just address the symptoms of a sick and staggering industry, argue groups like the CommonWell Health Alliance, The Sequoia Project, Carequality, EHNAC, and a handful of successful state-level health information exchange (HIEs) profiled in a new Government Accountability Office (GAO) report. 
Interoperability is the cure for the disease – if these various groups can work with vendors, healthcare organizations, and rule makers to address five critical barriers that stand in the way of the ability to use electronic health records the way they were intended for quality patient care.
Insufficient data standards
“While standards for electronically exchanging information among EHR systems exist, stakeholders and initiative representatives said that these standards are not sufficient for achieving EHR interoperability,” the report says to absolutely nobody’s surprise. 
Achieving broad adoption of data standards is the foundation of true health data interoperability.  Yet some vendors and healthcare organizations are still operating under outdated ideas about data ownership and the benefits of keeping patient information close to the vest.
READ MORE: Five Blockchain Use Cases for Healthcare Payers, Providers
Others are willing to share, but simply don’t have the capability to do so.  Many experts have put FHIR forward as the protocol that will enable vendors to embrace seamless data sharing in the near future; other groups like DirectTrust are trying to work around current roadblocks by enabling quick and simple exchange of information through vendor-agnostic secure messaging.
Regardless of the method they choose, vendors and private industry partnerships are doing their best to move away from proprietary data standards and focus on creating an interoperable ecosystem for the benefit of providers and patients. 
But it will take time, experts say, as well as patience, for these efforts to mature.  GAO notes that the majority of organizations included in the report are very new players in the game: most were founded just two or three years ago, which is hardly enough time to overcome some of the most intractable obstacles in one of the nation’s biggest industries.
Variations in state privacy rules
Lawmakers could help the process along, however, by harmonizing privacy rules across state lines.  “Stakeholders and initiative representatives said that exchanging health information with providers in other states, which is necessary for nationwide EHR interoperability, can be difficult,” the report notes.
READ MORE: Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
“According to a representative from one initiative, providers in opt-in states may be hesitant to exchange health information with providers in opt-out states if the providers lack assurance that the patients have explicitly consented to the exchange.”
Some of the most important information to exchange is also the most sensitive.  Many states require additional consent for providers to share mental health data or information such as HIV status, and electronic tools are not sophisticated enough to manage these complex tasks.
“Representatives from one initiative noted that they specifically do not include any mental health information in electronic health information exchange, even with patient consent, because of concerns about inadvertently violating privacy rules,” the report says. 
While the caution may be admirable, it makes it difficult for providers and patients to achieve the intended benefits of health information exchange, and may leave some clinicians poorly equipped to manage a patient’s underlying conditions or social and behavioral health needs.
Inadequate patient matching capabilities
Consent, data exchange, and accuracy are further complicated by the unreliability of current patient matching technologies.  Even if providers could streamline the challenges of sending sensitive information across state lines, they still cannot be sure that the data will be attributed to the right patient on the other end.
Disparate EHR systems may generate and store demographic information using different standards, making it impossible for providers to sort HIE records properly without adding another layer of technology created specifically to solve the problem. 
Health systems may also use varying criteria as the baseline for patient matching.  While some rely on addresses and names, others assign patients an internal case number that only works within their own system. 
“One initiative representative explained that a recent effort to achieve interoperability with another organization stalled because the other organization relies on a patient’s social security number for patient matching, but the initiative does not collect social security numbers for its patients,” GAO said.
Efforts to improve patient matching by developing a national patient identifier (NPI) have been stalled for years, leaving stakeholder groups like WEDI to come up with workaround technologies like the Virtual Clipboard.  Of the eighteen initiatives surveyed in the GAO report, thirteen are dedicating significant resources to solving the patient matching conundrum.
Financial concerns and investment costs
Perhaps even more challenging than the technical questions involved in overhauling the nation’s health IT infrastructure is finding the money to support these projects.  Healthcare organizations that have already invested thousands or millions of dollars in EHR systems that do not meet health data interoperability requirements are understandably reluctant to pour good money after bad.
“Stakeholders and initiative representatives said that the costs associated with achieving interoperability can be prohibitive for providers,” the report says, in part due to pricing structures developed by EHR vendors. 
“One stakeholder said that many EHR systems require multiple customized interfaces—which are specially designed connections to other health IT systems—in order to facilitate interoperability with other providers and organizations. The costs associated with these customized interfaces are typically paid by the EHR buyers,” the report continues.  Providers may also need to pay legal fees to lawyers who negotiate data sharing contracts between health systems. 
Interoperability organizations are trying to reduce the need for investments in EHR customization by simplifying the underlying technologies that connect health IT systems.  State or regional health information exchange organizations often do much of the heavy technical lifting for their members, in exchange for an annual fee, and may help to defray some of the costs around reinventing the wheel for each new member of the group.
Other groups are championing API technology as a cheap and effective way to circumvent the customization problem.  APIs allow providers to take advantage of the plug-and-play mentality that has been so successful in the mobile technology world, and represent a promising avenue for making health data interoperability more seamless.
Need for information governance, trust, and cooperation
But none of these technical advances will do much good for patients or providers if organizations are still reluctant to trust one another.  Industry groups must reassure healthcare organizations that the investments are worthwhile by laying out clear, comprehensive, and mutually beneficial frameworks for health information exchange.
“These governance practices can include organizational policies related to privacy, information security, data use, technical standards, and other issues that affect the exchange of information across organizational boundaries,” GAO suggests.
Building trust across a community of care requires providers to embrace a value-based, patient-centered vision of their role in the healthcare ecosystem.  Big data may be a strategic asset for individual organizations, but it only becomes truly powerful when patients traveling across the care continuum are able to access all their health information without restrictions.
As population health management and personalized care become more integral to changing reimbursement structures, providers are beginning to recognize the business care for health data interoperability and health information exchange.  Like the progression of technical standards, this evolution is a slow and difficult one.  But evidence for interoperability continues to grow, and providers are shifting their perspective to stay in step with reform efforts that align with the Triple Aim.
The argument for health data interoperability will become increasingly compelling as private industry and federal organizations continue their work to bring data standards, information governance, and health information exchange to providers who accept that cooperation and collaboration are the keys to success in the future. 
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBest PracticesHealth Information ExchangeInteroperabilityLists


