June ICD-10 End-to-End Testing Produces 90% Acceptance Rate

July 06, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 06, 2015 - The latest results from Medicare’s ICD-10 end-to-end testing seem to indicate an upward trend in the claims acceptance rate as the clock ticks down to October 1, 2015.  During June’s end-to-end testing week, 90 percent of test claims were accepted by CMS’ systems, a two-point increase over April’s numbers and a healthy 9 percent jump from the industry’s first attempt in January of 2015.
As ICD-10 opponents maintain their cries for leniency ahead of the long-awaited transition date, CMS continues to stress that its ICD-10 claims systems are ready and able to handle the technical challenges of the transition, while other advocacy groups try to convince wary providers that ICD-10 implementation won’t be the doomsday scenario many stakeholders fear.
“The June acknowledgement testing week once again demonstrated that CMS systems are ready for ICD- 10,” CMS said in a brief describing the latest results.   “In the June test, as in previous acknowledgement testing weeks, CMS found that most rejects resulted from improperly developed test claims unrelated to ICD-10. Most rejects were the result of provider submission errors in the testing environment that would not occur when actual claims are submitted for processing.”
Common errors included invalid National Provider Identifiers (NPI), missing or invalid beneficiary numbers, ZIP codes, or billing codes, and the use of future dates of service. 
CMS did not specifically state what percentage of claims were rejected due to inaccurate or invalid ICD-9 or ICD-10 codes, but that number hovered around 2 percent in April’s ICD-10 end-to-end testing attempt.  CMS processed more than 23,000 claims in April, but saw just 13,000 submitted claims in June.
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
A large portion of these test claims came from specialty providers, who comprised 46 percent of the testing organizations.  Fourteen percent of participants were general hospitals, while an additional three percent of the pool identified as critical access hospitals. 
Only 6 percent of the 1238 submitters were categorized as primary care providers.  PCPs have been among the most vocal opponents of ICD-10, citing huge financial burdens, administrative bottlenecks, and documentation woes that may make the transition prohibitively costly and complicated. 
The low participation numbers may indicate that the primary care community is still unprepared to conduct high-level testing with Medicare, even so close to the deadline – but it could also reflect the chronic wait-and-see attitude many providers have taken in the face of multiple last-minute extensions and delays. 
With the ICD-TEN Act still pending, providers may be hoping that they will have the ability to take their time over the next two years to ease into ICD-10 coding without fear of financial reprisal for submitting codes with less than perfect accuracy.
The Coalition for ICD-10 has taken a strong stand against the necessity for a two-year “grace period,” believing it to be unnecessary and potentially harmful for large-scale data integrity efforts.  Using the ICD-10 end-to-end testing results as evidence that only a tiny proportion of claims were rejected due to ICD-10 coding errors, the Coalition urges providers not to get caught up in “fears and anxieties” related to the switch.
READ MORE: Preventing Big Data Pain Points During a Healthcare Encounter
“Clearly if CMS had rejected all the claims containing non-specific codes, the ICD-10 rejection rate would have been much higher,” the Coalition said in a recent statement. “A safe harbor for the use of non-specific codes is unnecessary and detracts industry attention from getting ready for the ICD-10 compliance date. There is no evidence supporting the need for a safe harbor.”
“Unfortunately, the proposals to create a safe harbor for the use of less specific codes increase physicians’ fears and anxieties around the ICD-10 transition because they erroneously imply there is the possibility of widespread claims denials due to use of nonspecific codes.”
CMS has repeatedly stated that it cannot and should not require providers to code to a level of detail that is not supported by clinical documentation.  ICD-10 does include a number of very granular codes to use when a high level of detail is available, but the Coalition points out that the new code set also includes a wide variety of less specific codes that are intended to be used when the situation calls for it.
“If the only available information is that the lower leg is fractured, without specification of the type of fracture or specific bone involved, there are codes for unspecified fracture of left and right lower leg and even a code for unspecified fracture of unspecified lower leg (although one would hope that at least left or right side would be in the clinical documentation),” the Coalition says.
“And even if there is no ‘unspecified’ code, there are default codes designated for use when specific clinical details are unknown. For example, while there is no code for fracture of unspecified part of tibia, the index makes it clear that a code for fracture of the shaft of the tibia should be assigned when the part of the tibia involved in the fracture is not specified.”
READ MORE: The Role of Healthcare Data Governance in Big Data Analytics
As the deadline approaches with little indication of another reprieve waiting in the wings, providers may wish to better educate themselves about how the ICD-10 implementation will truly affect their coding and data integrity efforts if they wish to navigate the transition successfully. 
CMS continues to publish educational resources as they try to break down the most persistent myths around the switch, and providers are free to conduct acknowledgement testing up until the October 1, 2015 compliance date.  A large library of free preparation materials is available on the CMS ICD-10 website for providers.
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


