How are providers using EHRs, HIE for population health?

July 18, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 18, 2014 - While “population health management” may be one of those terms that means something different to each person who hears it, the words capture the overall spirit and momentum of healthcare reform in a unique way.  Providers are thinking big when it comes to a patient’s engagement, responsibility, and preventative care, and they’re leveraging technology to do it.
Whether it’s targeted diabetes care and clinical decision support that helps produce individualized treatment plans, or patient stratification techniques and clinical analytics, these pieces of the population health puzzle have one major thing in common: the use of EHRs, health information exchange, and other health IT infrastructure to make the magic happen.
What are some of the chief ways providers are using health IT to make a difference in the lives of patients by identifying trends in big data and applying the lessons to individual care?
Using EHRs to go above and beyond documentation
EHRs may not yet be a universal tool, but we’re getting there.  A new report from the Massachusetts eHealth Initiative (MeHI) found that 96% of primary care providers and 86% of specialists in the state are currently live on an EHR, and many more are planning to adopt the technology in the very near future.  And they aren’t just typing up clinical notes.  Eighty-one percent are using an EHR to facilitate medication reconciliation and quality reporting, while 64% of providers are engaging in clinical decision support.  More than half conduct public health reporting.
READ MORE: Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
Of the 32% who offer online personal health record (PHR) access to patients, 79% provide care summaries and 74% send reminders to schedule routine primary care services, missing tests, or other preventative measures.
Participating in health information exchange
Providers who are taking advantage of the robust capacity of EHRs to aid patient care and population health are also reaching out to their peers through health information exchanges (HIE).  In Maine, the state’s HIE just reported a 150% increase in participation in 2013, driven in part by the addition of clinical analytics services to the HealthInfoNet structure.  In the MeHI report, Massachusetts providers flagged easier data exchange as one of the top benefits of EHR adoption and one of the key drivers of quality improvement, better coordination for transitions of care, and improved patient safety.
Seventy-one percent of Massachusetts providers who participate in the state’s HIE use the system to conduct public health reporting, and 65% are sharing data with hospitals.  While just 18% are conducting transactions with other PCPs, three quarters believe that HIE can help to eliminate duplicate testing and 80% believe it will help coordination of care.
Partnerships for accountable care
READ MORE: Artificial Intelligence a “Low Priority” for Healthcare Orgs in 2018
Providers aren’t the only healthcare organizations interested in population health.  Payers are flocking to accountable care strategies that have the potential to reduce costs and close gaps in the care continuum.  Nearly every major payer in the country has launched some form of pay-for-performance program, whether through the patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model or a value-based purchasing contract.  Even former National Coordinator Dr. Farzad Mostashari is pinning his hopes on the growing prevalence of accountable care organizations (ACOs) among providers who see the benefit in banding together to share risk and savings.  Data analytics, both clinical and financial, provides the foundation for new reimbursement models, and EHRs are the underlying technology necessary for analytics.
“This is good for patients who will find that their trusted primary care doctors are more available and better informed than ever before,” Mostashari wrote in a blog post announcing his company’s launch. “It’s good for doctors who want to practice the best medicine possible, the way they always wanted to. It’s good for businesses and health plans looking for healthcare partners that deliver the highest possible value and outcomes. And it’s good for the country as higher quality, lower cost care will help lessen the strain on our budget and our economy.”
Collaborating for clinical analytics
Partnerships with stakeholders across the care community are becoming more and more essential for success in a data-driven world, and some organizations are taking on that challenge in a novel way.  The Michigan Health and Hospital Association (MHA) Keystone Center has announced that it will take on some of the burden of developing and deploying a clinical analytics infrastructure on behalf of its member hospitals, allowing providers to engage in quality improvement strategies on a larger scale.
Academic institutions like the University of North Dakota are also becoming hubs of data analytics for regional providers, offering hope that the chronic scarcity of resources many providers experience will become less of a barrier to participation in the brave new world of technology-enabled population health care.
Tagged Accountable CareClinical AnalyticsPatient EngagementPopulation Health Management


