Feb. 24 HIMSS14 vendor news, announcements, & demonstrations

February 24, 2014

By Nicole Freeman
February 24, 2014 - “Medical Insights” project from SAP to accelerate personalized treatment for cancer patients: To support patients in receiving the maximum benefit from every research and healthcare dollar spent, SAP AG  is developing innovative solutions aimed at significantly improving health outcomes while cutting costs and improving outcomes at each step of healthcare delivery. Providing the latest example, the company today announced the first early, live deployment of the project “Medical Insights” for clinical data integration, an important advancement in cancer treatment. The announcement was made at HIMSS14 , being held February 23-27 in Orlando, Florida.
ConvergeHEALTH by Deloitte announces Health System Intellect, a comprehensive analytics solution suite to manage margin, cost and quality: Today at HIMSS14, ConvergeHEALTH by Deloitte announces the availability of Health System Intellect, an industry leading analytics solution that provides integrated views of clinical, operational and financial analytics to optimize reporting and performance at the process and key performance indicator level. 
Omnicell to showcase benefits of interoperability and clinical analytics at HIMSS 2014 Conference: As part of HIMSS 2014, Omnicell, Inc., a leading provider of medication and supply management solutions to healthcare systems, will showcase the interoperability of its automated dispensing systems in the HIMSS Interoperability Showcase and the Intelligent Hospital Pavilion along with partner collaborations and customer presentations across the exhibition floor.
Harris Corporation unveils FusionFX – advanced healthcare integration platform: Harris Corporation, an international communications and information technology company, launched an advanced integration platform for healthcare providers worldwide during the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS) conference being held February 23-27 in Orlando, Florida. Harris’ FusionFX is an integrated suite of software tools that securely brings together patient information from across the entire continuum of care and makes it available to clinical teams for value-based, accountable and coordinated care.
Information Builders helps healthcare providers build trust in their data to meet new clinical, operational, and regulatory demands: Today at the 2014 HIMSS Annual Conference and Expo, Information Builders, a leader in business intelligence (BI) and analytics, information integrity, and integration solutions, announced that healthcare providers are increasingly leveraging its solutions, WebFOCUS and iWay, to drive operational efficiencies and improve patient care.
READ MORE: CA Children’s Hospitals Win Davies Award for Analytics, Safety
NantHealth unveils industry’s first open, intelligent Clinical Operating System (cOS) at HIMSS14: From the floor of the HIMSS14 Conference and Exhibition, NantHealth, a transformational healthcare IT company converging science and technology through a single integrated clinical platform, today unveiled the NantHealth Clinical Operating System (cOS) for value-based care. cOS is the first intelligent cloud-based platform integrating clinical, financial, operational and environmental data to improve quality, lower costs, and drive value for accountable care organizations, health systems, hospitals, physicians and patients.
Texas Children’s Hospital to speak at HIMSS14 annual conference on importance of using data to improve quality of care and patient outcomes: Dr. Charles Macias, director of the Evidence Based Outcomes Center/Center for Clinical Effectiveness and chief clinical systems integration officer at Texas Children’s Hospital, and Kathleen Carberry, RN, MPH, director of the Texas Children’s Hospital Outcomes and Impact Service, will present two informative talks on using data to improve patient outcomes and drive efficiency in health care delivery at the 2014 Annual Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS) Conference & Exhibition.  The conference will take place in Orlando, Florida from Feb. 23 through 27.
Medstreaming to present “All-in-One” Clinical Data Management IT solutions at HIMSS Annual Meeting: Medstreaming, a leading developer of medical information technology (IT) solutions, is presenting the company’s “All-in-One” Clinical Data Management (CDM) Platform and announcing its expanded analytics module at the Healthcare Information Management Systems Society (HIMSS) annual conference being held February 23 – 27, 2014. Medstreaming’s integrated platform technology fuses medical imaging and healthcare data allowing for the creation of CDM.
Canon U.S.A. to showcase latest paper to ehr solutions for healthcare environments at HIMSS 2014: Canon U.S.A., Inc., a leader in digital imaging solutions, will demonstrate its document capture strategies designed to help expedite workflows and enhance information exchange at the Healthcare Information Management Systems Society Annual Conference (HIMSS) Orange County Convention Center, Orlando from February 23-27, 2014 in booth #829. As new healthcare legislation continues to transform the industry, providers are seeking new ways to help organizations streamline costs while providing outstanding patient care. At the show, Canon will feature a comprehensive set of products and solutions that support the organization, security and mobility of patient information – while helping to increase productivity and create more seamless business processes.
Precyse drives health information performance at HIMSS 2014: Precyse, a leader in health information management (HIM) Performance Management and Technology, will demonstrate to healthcare organizations how to drive health information performance at the HIMSS 2014 Annual Conference & Exhibition February 23-27, 2014 (Booth #3613). Precyse is once again a HIMSS Gold Sponsor, and will also sponsor the HIMSS ICD-10 Pre-Conference Symposium and host the HIMSS 2014 Lunch & Learn Panel Discussion.
READ MORE: Epic EHR, Big Data Tools Bring 2016 HIMSS Davies Award to Mercy
HP showcases healthcare solutions to drive transformation across industry: HP today expanded its leading healthcare portfolio with solutions designed to help healthcare providers improve workflow, enhance patient and caregiver experience, and reduce compliance risk. Featured HP healthcare solutions at the 2014 HIMSS Conference & Exhibition include tablets and PCs that provide access to electronic medical records, thin client and print solutions to improve workflow, and workstations that provide the performance and reliability required for healthcare environments. Each solution is designed to help physicians and nurses gain access to information and streamline day-to-day tasks so they can focus on patient care.
Tagged HIMSSHIMSS14


