Professional Societies, Universities Embrace Big Data Analytics

February 12, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 12, 2015 - Healthcare providers may approach team-based clinical care with various degrees of willingness, but when it comes to big data analytics, collaboration is the name of the game.  While some forward-thinking hospitals and health systems are investing in the development and deployment of their own clinical analytics tools, academic institutions and professional societies are becoming hotbeds of innovation in the big data sphere, marrying clinical knowhow with research expertise and the endorsement of a trusted reputation.
The American College of Cardiology has developed a new research databank comprised of close to 5 million patients that will allow researchers unprecedented access to six years of anonymized data for population health management, clinical outcomes research, and the testing and development of tailored therapies.
“This analytic platform is ground-breaking in the level of data it will provide,” said John S. Rumsfeld, MD, PhD, FACC, Chief Science Officer of the American College of Cardiology National Cardiovascular Data Registries. “The partnership between ACC and Symphony Health Solutions (SHS) brings together the detailed clinical data from the registries with the longitudinal data resources of SHS. This creates a synergy that can yield critical insights on improving cardiovascular care and patient outcomes.”
Professional societies are using their influence with their provider members to assemble data sets far larger than most individual health systems could hope for.  Patient registries developed with big data analytics capabilities, like the fledgling CancerLinQ project from the American Society of Clinical Oncology, and a diabetes databank developed by the American College of Cardiology, the American Diabetes Association, and the American College of Physicians, allow specialists to pool their knowledge for the greater good.
“Internal medicine physician specialists are on the front lines of diabetes care,” said American College of Physicians President David A. Fleming, MD, FACP. “The Diabetes Collaborative Registry will enable effective and patient-centered communication among doctors across specialties, an especially important component for high value care of patients with diseases like diabetes that often have coexisting illnesses.”
READ MORE: FDA Holds App-a-Thon for Precision Medicine, Next-Gen Genomics
“We hope that a cross-specialty, clinical registry will ultimately allow us to improve the quality of care—and therefore quality of life—for all people living with diabetes by giving researchers a clearer picture of what’s happening to patients at various stages of their disease,” added American Diabetes Association Chief Scientific and Medical Officer Robert E. Ratner, MD, FACP, FACE. “Improved data collection should help us improve patient outcomes.”
Meanwhile, Carnegie Mellon University, Highmark Health, and Allegheny Health Network have announced $1.7 million in big data analytics projects aimed at everything from cancer therapies based on nanotechnology to improved methods of breast cancer screening and the detection of early stage melanoma lesions.
“Carnegie Mellon is at the center of the confluence of data analytics, machine learning, science and engineering. We are leveraging that expertise towards health care applications,” said Alan Russell, Ph.D., director of Carnegie Mellon’s Disruptive Health Technology Institute (DHTI) and Chief Innovation Officer for Allegheny Health Network.  “The DHTI payer-provider-innovator infrastructure that we have created is essential in pushing innovative technology off the bench for deployable solutions.  Involving the payer community and their expertise, at the beginning, in the innovation process is at the heart of helping drive innovation more quickly toward patient care.”
“The goal when forming DHTI was to establish an industry-leading collaborative effort that allows the payer, innovators, and clinicians to work together to create breakthrough health care solutions that reinforce our mission to deliver health care at the right time, at the right place and at the right cost,” added said David Holmberg, president and CEO of Highmark Health.
Academic institutions are not only training the next generation of big data analytics scientists, but they are putting their students and post-docs to work in newly established laboratories, research centers, and innovation incubators at a lightning pace.
READ MORE: NIH Opens Up “All of Us” to Research Participants Nationwide
UCLA recently announced the formation of its new Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biosciences (QCBio), which will attempt to uncover new insights into the role of genetics in patient care, which aligns with the nation’s new focus on precision medicine.  At Columbia University in New York, genetics is also on the agenda as a $30 million collaboration with Biogen Idec moves forward at the university’s Institute for Genomics.
“This collaboration marries the exceptional drug development expertise of Biogen with cutting-edge genomics expertise at Columbia University Medical Center,” David Goldstein, PhD, founding director of the Institute. “It will not only focus on target identification and validation at the early stages of drug development, but also facilitate genetically informed evaluation of treatments.”
As these new big data analytics tools and research opportunities move forward, collaborations with healthcare providers that put the resources into practice will also flourish, turning theory into practice, and practice into improved patient care. “Our understanding of human genetics is rapidly expanding, and there is growing recognition that the elucidation of the genetic causes of disease will have a transformative effect on both patient care and drug development in many different diseases,” Goldstein said.
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsMedical Research


