Does high-intensity care improve Medicare patient outcomes?

October 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 03, 2014 - Medicare patients undergoing major surgery experienced more serious and numerous complications at hospitals with a propensity for providing aggressive and intensive treatment, says a study published in JAMA this week, but those patients were also 5 percent less likely to die due to a failure-to-rescue during a major complication.  With higher-intensity facilities under sharp scrutiny for more extravagant spending and greater overall costs associated with care, the study calls into question the effectiveness of their treatment style in an era of pay-for-performance reimbursements.
Researchers from the University of Michigan Ann Arbor used Medicare data on more than 706,000 patients at 2,544 hospitals who underwent one of seven major surgical events.  The team correlated patient complications and outcomes to the Dartmouth Atlas of Healthcare’s Hospital Care Intensity (HCI) Index, which sorts organizations by the number of physician encounters and inpatient days for patients in their last two years of life.  The intensity scores of the hospitals in the study varied from .35 to 3.41, indicating a significant difference in the amount and style of care provided by the facilities.
The unadjusted mortality rate for the patient cohort was 6.4 percent, the study found, while the unadjusted major complication rate was 31.2 percent.  The highest mortality rate occurred after a lower extremity amputation, and the highest number of complications occurred after a hip fracture repair.  Coronary artery bypass grafting produced the lowest unadjusted mortality and morbidity rates.
Hospitals that ranked on the higher end of the HCI Index experienced a 32.1 percent morbidity rate compared to 31.0 percent at low-HCI hospitals, but also saw.1 percent fewer mortality events.  Failure-to-rescue rates were statistically significantly lower at high-HCI hospitals: 13.5 percent compared to 14.2 percent at low-HCI facilities.  High-HCI organizations saw an average inpatient stay of 25.2 days in a patient’s last two years of life compared to just 15.6 at low-intensity hospitals.  High-intensity organizations also saw significantly more physician visits, with 6.4 per patient compared to just 2.8 at hospitals on the lowest end of the scale.
Dig Deeper
EHRs, Clinical Decision Support Top 2017 Patient Safety Hazard List
Vendors Push Big Data Analytics, but Hospitals Focus on Safety, Security
How Big Data Velocity Informs Population Health, Patient Safety
“These data have significant implications for surgeons given the increasing age and preexisting disease burden of today’s surgical patients,” the authors write. “Managing these patients and their complications imposes substantial demands on care teams and the financiers of their care.Previous work has also shown that many elderly decedents undergo operations in their last year of life, suggesting that aggressive treatment styles are not tempered by manifestations of advanced disease.”
“As health care reform pushes for more efficient care, it will be critically important for surgeons to understand when and how resources and effort are met with tangible benefits to the patients,” the study concludes. “Changes in hospital culture (eg, unconscious caregiver attitudes and behaviors) and climate (eg, conscious perceptions of hospital leadership and authority) may provide greater leverage to reduce failure-to-rescue rates within hospitals. Ultimately, payment-reform strategies should be informed by the clinical evidence for and against the specific care practices that underlie the vast differences in treatment styles observed across the United States.”
Tagged Hospital QualityPatient CarePatient Safety


