Big data analytics, population health combine to improve quality

September 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 17, 2014 - Addressing all three branches of the Triple Aim – reducing cost, improving quality, and raising the level of population health – is a daunting task for any healthcare provider.  At Froedtert and the Medical College of Wisconsin, Chief Medical Officer Dr. Jonathon Truwit is at the beginning of the journey towards harnessing the power of big data analytics to provide insights into the health system’s population.
Dr. Truwit sat down with HealthITAnalytics to discuss the importance of population health management and to outline the steps his organization is taking to integrate clinical analytics and data-driven decision making into the process of providing optimal levels of patient care.
What are some of the challenges that made you start investing in population health management?
Froedtert & the Medical College of Wisconsin Health Network  is a three-hospital system, plus we have about 150 primary care physicians and advanced practitioners in the community, and another 25 or so specialists.  We partner with the Medical College of Wisconsin, so we have an academic presence and a community presence.
We’re trying to prepare for a quickly changing landscape.  I will tell you, in Wisconsin the penetration of population health and managed at-risk contracts is still small, but we know that’s going to change.  We don’t know exactly how much it’s going to change, and so we’re trying to prepare ourselves for anything.  We’re also part of Integrated Health Network (IHN), which is five health systems and a medical school working together.  Even though we’re competitors with each other in southeast Wisconsin, we’re also sharing together as we approach population health to learn from each other and improve together.  And we do have an at-risk contract with UnitedHealthcare, so we use IHN for much of our data.
READ MORE: Cerner Pilot Uses Population Health Analytics for Chronic Care
What are the advantages of implanting health IT tools to help you manage your patient population?
The advantage for us to embrace Explorys as our analytics vendor is that we will be putting information in the hands of the clinician.  It also provides data to the team prior to arrival.  Not only can we see where our gaps in care are, but we can reach out to patients who are connected to us.  Maybe they’re only loosely connected to us, but attributed to us. It may be that you’re my patient, but you haven’t been seeing me in five years because you’re so healthy that you just come in when you have some urgent need or when you feel like it.  But I’m still responsible for you, from a population health point of view, whether I see you or not, because you’ve been assigned to us in the population health metrics.
So the software gives us a lot of opportunity.  I can make an inquiry, and within five minutes I get a response.  Also, we get to benchmark ourselves against other providers.  We can see how we’re doing, not just amongst the six systems in IHN, but also against other systems like Cleveland Clinic, OhioHealth, and some other organizations.
It’s very helpful for outpatient metrics, because there aren’t really any good national databases for it.  CMS has been so focused on the inpatient side of things.  That’s going to change, but right now, we’re lucky in Wisconsin that we actually do have outpatient data through the Wisconsin Healthcare Cooperative, which actually is a terrific way to see how we all perform.  Again, the key is getting us data that’s actionable, that can change the way we care for patients, improve in our metrics, and improve in our outcomes to improve the population health.  We’re excited.
Where are your opportunities to improve efficiency and reduce costs?
READ MORE: State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
I think that we have opportunity in readmissions.  We’re about average.  We don’t like being average, so we’re going to work on that.  We’re actually pretty good in chronic disease management.  I tell our board that we’re darn good, but I never say we’re excellent, because once you start thinking you’re excellent, you stop trying to get better.  So we’re just darn good.
I think our ED utilization is one of the ways that we’re going to impact our readmissions as well, but we will be able to utilize this data to hotspot our patients to find out where our patients are and where they’re challenged.  Often, patients are really dealing with socioeconomic issues, and it’s less about the actual medications.  So this will give us a chance to find out where opportunities are to reduce cost while we improve quality.  It’s more than just trying to save costs.  We are really going for the value proposition to improve health and quality at the same time, reduce our cost.  From a clinician’s perspective, that’s really why this is attractive.  We’re working on all three parts of the Triple Aim.
What’s your advice to other healthcare providers who are interested in starting the population health process?
The first question they have to ask themselves is if they believe they’re moving towards better population health.  And the answer should be yes.  Then, they have to ask, “If we change our business model, are the present business rules going to work?”  And the answer is no, because our business rules have been oriented towards fee-for-service.
You have to start saying, “Well, what data do I need to understand the population?”  The biggest thing is that you need to understand who your patients are if you’re going to improve the care on the population health front.  I’d like to get excellent care to every patient regardless of whether they’re in an insurance program, at risk, not at risk, or not insured at all.  The conventions are different.  The rules are different, and you need tools to help you understand people you’re dealing with so you can make the best choices for their care.
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


