Healtheway Rebrands to Promote Health Data Interoperability

June 25, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 25, 2015 - Healtheway, one of the nation’s most successful health data interoperability collaborations to date, announced a new strategy and direction this morning, punctuated by a name change.  The non-profit organization that supports the national eHealth Exchange and the Carequality network will now be known as The Sequoia Project, officials said, in an effort to better reflect the optimism and scope of burgeoning health information exchange and health data interoperability capabilities across the healthcare continuum.
“We chose the name, The Sequoia Project, because sequoia trees are among the largest and oldest on earth,” said Mariann Yeager, CEO of The Sequoia Project. “The name is aspirational; we’re building something that can grow on a national scale and that can stand the test of time.”
“The sequoia tree is also interesting because each tree can stand alone, but when there is a cluster of trees, their shallow root systems connect, supporting each other and accelerating their growth,” she added. “Similarly, individual organizations and interoperability initiatives in health IT become much stronger and deliver more value by working together. That was also the rationale behind our new tagline: ‘Connected We Stand.’”
Healtheway oversees two major HIE and interoperability coalitions that help providers delivery more coordinated, informed care to patients.  The ONC relinquished control of the eHealth Exchange to Healtheway in late 2012, and the network has seen sustained growth since then.  At the beginning of 2014, more than 6000 large physician groups, 800 hospitals, and 850 retail pharmacies were participating in the health information exchange network.
The group’s other initiative, Carequality, was born more recently as a way to connect a “network of networks” in pursuit of large-scale health data interoperability.  The collaboration has attracted many notable names in the health IT sector, including Epic Systems, Surescripts, Kaiser Permanente, Greenway, eClinicalWorks, and Intermountain Healthcare. 
READ MORE: What Healthcare IT Users Don’t Really Need to Know about FHIR
While not a direct challenge to the CommonWell Alliance, which has coalesced around many of Carequality’s EHR vendor competitors, the network produced some ruffled feathers earlier in 2015 as stakeholders sniped at each other for seemingly choosing sides.
Both initiatives have uniquely prepared The Sequoia Project to move forward with its daunting tasks of developing meaningful health data interoperability across the largest possible segment of the provider community, Yeager said.
“The Sequoia Project cut its teeth on some of the biggest health information exchange projects in the country,” she said. “We already operate the largest health information exchange network in the US and we’re making real progress on connecting all existing networks nationwide together for interoperability. The new branding signifies an even more ambitious goal; to encourage participation in initiatives of all health IT stakeholders and expand initiatives to cover an even broader spectrum of challenges standing in the way of free exchange of health data across the country.”
The Sequoia Project will tackle three major areas of industry leadership, including the development of new initiatives in the health information exchange area, ongoing engagement with policymakers and healthcare stakeholders to promote pilot projects and provide subject matter expertise, and the expansion of education and research activities that will help to promote more sophisticated, accurate, and impactful health data interoperability.
The Project plans to continue its collaborations with major industry groups such as HIMSS and WEDI, which both expressed their unreserved support for the non-profit’s ultimate goals of creating the data-driven infrastructure required for population health management, quality reporting, and effective participation in value-based reimbursement.
READ MORE: Blockchain Aims to Foster Payer, Provider Trust for Value-Based Care
"WEDI has been collaborating closely with Healtheway for years given the complementary nature of our work. Now that Healtheway has become The Sequoia Project, that partnership will continue,” stated Devin Jopp, President and CEO of WEDI. “We will continue to feed each other's work with the goal of promoting interoperability on all fronts. We applaud The Sequoia Project for its focus on interoperability and its approach to creating a neutral forum for all contributing to this important work."
"The Sequoia Project is an essential voice in the community, added Joyce Sensmeier, Vice President of Informatics at HIMSS. “As a nonprofit singularly focused on furthering the public's interest, its voice transcends the perspective of individual stakeholders to reflect an industry-wide perspective on data exchange. It's important to have an organization serve in this role, working in collaboration with other like-minded organizations, because together we are working to improve individual and population health through the use of information technology."
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealth Data ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceInteroperability


