PCMH model, EHRs provide better care for patients, study says

June 04, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 04, 2014 - Providers functioning under the patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model and aided by electronic health records (EHRs) typically provide better care than less coordinated peers, finds a study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine.  Patients participating in a PCMH program receive more preventative screenings and pertinent tests than others, writes lead author Dr. Lisa Kern, an associate professor of healthcare policy and research at Weill Cornell Medical College, adding to mounting evidence that care coordination supported by EHR technology is a critical part of ensuring patient wellness and high quality care.
“The study showed that primary care physicians participating in PCMHs improved their quality of care over time at a significantly higher rate than their non-PCMH peers,” said Kern. “The PCMH model combines EHRs with organizational changes, including changes in the roles and responsibilities of clinicians and staff. It was the combination of EHRs plus organizational changes that was associated with the greatest quality improvement; EHRs alone were not enough.”
The study examined the Hudson Valley region of New York State, including 312 primary care providers and more than 143,000 patients within the seven-county area.  Paper-based providers, EHR users who were not PCMH members, and EHR-enabled PCMH organizations were examined based on a variety of quality metrics.  PCMH providers improved significantly more than other providers in four out of the ten areas of measurement, including eye exams, A1C testing for diabetic patients, chlamydia screenings, and colorectal cancer screenings.  “The odds of overall quality improvement in the PCMH group were 7% higher than in the paper-based group and 6% higher than in the EHR [only] group,” Kern writes.
“This is an important study of a model of healthcare delivery that has been disseminated widely but which has not been as widely proven to improve healthcare. Practices that transform into PCMHs may be well positioned for additional changes to healthcare delivery, such as participation in accountable care organizations and other forms of population health management,” added senior author Dr. Rainu Kaushal, chair of the Department of Healthcare Policy and Research and the Frances and John L. Loeb Professor of Medical Informatics at Weill Cornell.
Dig Deeper
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
Patient-Centered Medical Home Has Saved Payer $1.2B Since 2011
The study suggests that the cultural changes involved in shifting an organization to a PCMH practice, including a greater focus on individualized care and more accountable population health management, may have helped to separate the high performing providers from the rest of the pack.
Tagged Accountable CarePatient Centered Medical HomePopulation Health Management


