Using big data governance to unlock healthcare archive value

October 02, 2013

By Chris Grossman
October 02, 2013 - In some ways, healthcare big data is similar to other industries’ data in that it’s diverse, with both unstructured and structured formats and it’s often held captive in information silos. As in other sectors, healthcare organizations hope that analytics will help provide insight into valuable knowledge to improve efficiency and service quality.
In other ways, however, healthcare big data is different. Healthcare organizations face two unique issues:
Healthcare data’s massive volume – The confluence of two distinct healthcare information sources has created a multiplier effect, which translates into enormous amounts of data. One stream of digitized data comes from new patient information which is captured in electronic health records and other digital repositories. A second source is old paper records which are scanned or manually entered into electronic systems. How voluminous is healthcare big data? A recent report by the Institute for Health Technology Transformation (iHT2) estimated that the volume of healthcare data in the United States reached 150 exabytes in 2011. Some have calculated that one exabyte is the equivalent of 100,000 times the content in the U.S. Library of Congress.
Information classification leads to more unstructured healthcare data – Classification becomes more important as healthcare organizations consider using analytics to derive greater value from data. Typically, healthcare data has been classified by patient. Yet, in today’s world of data driven decision-making, organizations want to analyze data by other criteria, such as by year, provider, or type of medical procedure. Adding multiple classifications to data transforms it from structured data to unstructured data.
Dig Deeper
Information Governance Gaining Ground in Healthcare Organizations
HIM Pros Must Shift from Coding to Health Informatics, Analytics
IoT, Analytics, HIM Push Healthcare IT VC Market Past $5B
Against this backdrop, data governance in healthcare takes on greater significance. In fact, iHT2 has suggested that enterprise data governance is the most critical priority to guarantee the success of healthcare big data initiatives. Data governance addresses controls across the entire lifecycle of information, from creation to destruction. While the scope of data governance is broad, archiving must not be overlooked as a key component for helping healthcare organizations derive value from their vast stores of information. Here are three issues to consider related to data governance and information archives:
1. The value of a single source of search. To support analytics, organizations must have an archiving solution that provides a single source of search. Healthcare data is known for its large number of proprietary file formats. A good archiving tool will include a search tool that supports multiple file formats. In addition, as paper records are scanned into archiving systems, optical character recognition (OCR) is essential for in-document and on-document searching. Archiving solutions should either support OCR natively or support integration with external OCR systems.
2. The importance of protecting patient data. Healthcare organizations must comply with regulations such as HIPAA to prevent unauthorized access to protected health information (PHI) and personally identifiable information (PII). Data governance plays a key role in defining what types of PHI and PII exist within an organization’s information ecosystem, as well as in setting policies to ensure that data is secure throughout the information life cycle. From an archiving perspective, encryption and redaction are both effective ways to protect patient privacy.
3. The need to define how long data is retained. Given the large volumes of healthcare data that a single organization must manage, archiving some of that information is a necessity. Not every type of data, however, has the same retention requirements. One aspect of data governance is analyzing the different types of data owned by the organization and determining how long each type must be retained. A common rule of thumb is that adult patient data should be stored for at least seven years.
In any industry sector, possessing big data alone is not enough. The key is to leverage that information in productive ways. The policies and processes that are developed through data governance can help healthcare organizations derive as much value as possible from their information, while complying with regulatory requirements and protecting patient privacy.
Chris Grossman is the Senior VP of Enterprise Applications for Rand Secure Archive.
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsHealth Information ManagementHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Data Analytics


