Gauging the maturity of your business intelligence systems

September 12, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 12, 2013 - The analytics business might still be in its infancy, but kids grow up so fast these days, and being young doesn’t mean you can’t be mature.  Organizations that have successfully navigated their EHR implementations, thought through their data governance strategies, and are actively working towards manipulating and acting upon their collections of clinical and financial data can create analytics structures that are both streamlined and sophisticated if they have the right tools and a strong vision.
A new HIMSS Analytics report shows that business intelligence (BI) is steadily gaining ground, with 46% of hospitals using some sort of clinical and BI system to extract and scrutinize data.  More than half of those hospitals draw information from their EHR systems, but few participants were likely to purchase specifically targeted best-of-breed analytics solutions, indicating that they were satisfied with the tools they already have in place.
But is that satisfaction sufficient?  Jim Adams, Executive Director of Research and Insights at The Advisory Board Company might say no.  In an interview with Information Week, Adams explains the four levels of BI maturity in healthcare systems, and argues for a cohesive strategy that emphasizes deep knowledge of data and what it can do.  Right now, those hospitals that cherry-pick tools for certain applications – like those HIMSS participants who may be satisfied with what their EHRs can do – are only on the first step of the ladder towards true analytics: the “fragmented” stage.
“Many organizations are very early in their journey toward BI,” he says, focusing more on small steps to solve specific problems rather than viewing data as a strategic asset.  The next step, he says, is creating an organizational culture that “champions emerging and growing emphasis on fact-based decisions,” moving beyond the tunnel vision of the first stage and really embracing a centralized infrastructure, consolidated core standards and best practices, and a thorough knowledge of data modeling.
Dig Deeper
Healthcare CIOs Turning to Data Analytics for Business Intelligence
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Healthcare Business Intelligence, Big Data Tools Spark Investment
This “enterprise” phase requires executive buy-in to the idea of using data to produce actionable results, as well as the foresight to invest in infrastructure and software tools to lead the system from descriptive analytics towards advanced analytics, including predictive modeling and trend forecasting.
“Descriptive [analytics] answers the question: What happened? Predictive answers the question: What might happen? Prescriptive says: What should we do to address what happened or what might happen?” Adams explains.  This maturity allows business intelligence to become business improvement, zeroing in on proactive population health management, financial strategies to increase revenue, and clinical improvements to keep quality high and patients satisfied with their care.
The final level is truly harnessing the power of “big data”, a buzz word that’s been thrown around with wild abandon, but has been really accessible only to a few high-level organizations.  Real-time trending that produces reports clinicians can use on a daily basis is the key to BI maturity, Adams says.  “If you want to identify patients who are at high risk for hospital readmission, for example, you can’t do that once a month. You have to do that daily, or even near real time. In healthcare, we have lots of data but don’t really have ‘big data’ as defined in many other industries.”
While most hospitals are still in the first few stages of analytics maturity, organizations are aspiring to full integration of analytics into their everyday decision making.  Using “pervasive, persistent, and timely data” along with “consistent, timely, seamless internal and external care coordination” based on analytics activities is key to creating an organization that leads the field, the HIMSS report says, in improved patient care and optimized efficiencies.
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare Data Strategy


