Population Health Management May Show ROI in Just Three Years

January 15, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 15, 2015 - Worried that population health management is more expensive than it’s worth?  You might wish to reconsider.  A new survey by KPMG LLP indicates that more than half of healthcare organizations that have invested in population health management infrastructure have seen or expect to see a full return on their investment within three to four years of deployment.  Data analytics tools take even less time to pay themselves off, averaging about two years for many organizations.  And with population health technology in place, healthcare providers report that other programs, such as meaningful use, become easier to manage.
“Our clients see benefits from population health management programs as a part of the solution to reduce avoidable medical costs and variability in care,” said West Johnson, a KPMG advisory partner who heads provider transformation. “Preventive care is given a big priority in these programs, since they deliver improvements in efficient and effective care with a high degree of patient engagement.”
The poll found that 56 percent of healthcare managers think the population health management tools will pay for themselves within three to four years, with an additional 29 percent forecasting a more conservative ROI of five or more years.  Just 14 percent believe that their investment will produce no measurable returns in care quality or financial savings.
The development of more robust preventative care programs was the top benefit most providers expected to see from their population health projects, followed by an increase in evidence-based clinical decision making and better chronic disease management for patients.  While a quarter of respondents reported that they anticipated trouble getting clinical and administrative staff to accept the changes involved in implementing new care protocols, more than forty percent believed that organizations that successfully navigate the changes may have an easier time establishing new relationships with payers and attesting to meaningful use.
Dig Deeper
How the Healthcare “Value Chain” Leads to Big Data Analytics Success
Population Health is Top Data Analytics Challenge for Providers, Payers
Big Data, PCP Engagement Aid Mount Sinai with Population Health
“Healthcare providers are facing a seismic shift in the coming years, largely because government and commercial payers will increasingly decline to pay for avoidable hospital visits,” said Joe Kuehn, a KPMG partner with the healthcare advisory practice. “Providers and other participants in the care delivery system need the real time data and analytic tools to not only manage and improve the quality of care provided, but also the ability to measure costs to operate efficiently.”
Population health management has the potential to reduce costs and improve quality in a number of different areas, including fewer preventable readmissions, lower emergency department use, and improved patient engagement.   Yet many healthcare organizations have been putting population analytics on the back burner as they struggle to stretch their resources to cover all of the projects in front of them.
Even the majority of optimistic providers in the KPMG survey don’t think they have done enough to count their population health infrastructure as mature.  Just a quarter believe their capabilities could be viewed as “mature,” while sixty-one percent believe they are somewhere in the beginning stages.  Forty-two percent of providers cited costs as the reason why they are having difficulty getting off the ground.  Encouragingly, only 13 percent view meaningful use as an “impediment or distraction from other quality improvement initiatives.  Forty-two percent believe that the two initiatives can work together to help an organization achieve its goals for reliance on health IT infrastructure that can produce lower costs and improve care for patients.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealthcare Business IntelligencePopulation Health Management


