NIH Awards $35.4M in EHR Genomics, Precision Medicine Grants

September 03, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 03, 2015 - The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is jumpstarting the nation’s precision medicine efforts by awarding more than $35 million in grants to academic and healthcare organizations researching the best ways to integrate genomic data into electronic health records. 
The ten pending grants, averaging just over $3 million each, will join two larger gifts to Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine, tipping the NIH’s investment over the $50 million mark thus far.
The grants intend to further the precision medicine research undertaken by the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI)’s Electronic Medical Records and Genomics (eMERGE) network, a cross-industry collaboration to develop a greater understanding of how a patient’s DNA can be leveraged to create personalized therapies for a variety of difficult-to-treat diseases. 
“The newly funded projects are focused on discovering genes and gene variants with clinical implications by using the latest sequencing technologies to examine rare and common variants suspected to relate to disease risk and treatment effects,” said Rongling Li, MD, PhD, program director for eMERGE in the Division of Genomic Medicine at NHGRI, a part of NIH.
Dig Deeper
NIH, Pharma Orgs Launch $215M Precision Medicine, Cancer Project
NIH to Bring Precision Medicine Data Collection to Patient Homes
Academia Dives into Precision Medicine, Big Data Collaborations
“The other important component of these grants is implementing what researchers learn about these gene variants into medical settings to improve patient care,” Li added.  Researchers will focus on approximately 100 genes that show promise for bringing precision medicine techniques into the clinical setting most quickly.
Many of the projects hope to tackle the root causes of common chronic diseases, such as diabetes and cardiovascular diseases, while others will use big data and predictive analytics to study autism, immune system conditions, drug metabolism, and cancer.
At Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center in Ohio, principle investigator John Harley, MD, PhD, will use a $3.4 million, four-year grant to sequence 100 genes from 2500 patient participants in an effort to identify the genetic causes of a number of conditions.  Harley will also study patient preferences in relation to receiving genetic testing results, focusing on what information adolescents would like to receive about their potential risks.
Marc Williams, MD, and Marylyn Ritchie, PhD, at Geisinger Health System will use $3.5 million for a big data analytics project that will comb through EHR data to discover patterns in familial hypercholesterolemia and chronic rhinosinusitis.  The researchers will also investigate how environmental factors impact the development of sinusitis, as well as how patients and their families make decisions about genetic testing and communicate results with one another.
Patient privacy, communication, and ethical concerns figure highly in several of the proposals as clinicians and researchers move into uncharted social and clinical territory.  While risk scores and predictive analytics are increasingly allowing clinicians to inform patients of the potential for negative outcomes in relatively limited circumstances, the growing affordability and popularity of genetic testing opens up new possibilities for misinterpretation, needless anxiety, and even unnecessary preventative procedures.
Providers and researchers must carefully explore the best way to handle these issues on an individual patient basis as precision medicine becomes a more common methodology for treatment.  As the NIH continues to develop its growing network of researchers at institutions across the country, it will become increasingly important to develop and share best practices for integrating the patient perspective into precision medicine’s promising and potentially revolutionary way of viewing clinical care. 
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPrecision Medicine


