What Does the Stage 3 Meaningful Use Rule Mean for Analytics?

March 20, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 20, 2015 - CMS released its long-awaited proposal for the Stage 3 meaningful use criteria Friday evening, and it appears that federal regulators have taken to heart many of the industry’s most vocal requests.  The Stage 3 proposed rule includes a number of administrative and technical changes, including simpler reporting periods and an increased focus on data quality, EHR interoperability, and healthcare analytics.
Building on Stage 1 and Stage 2 requirements that have worked to set the stage for a more data-driven, interoperable learning health system, the Stage 3 meaningful use criteria will eventually bring all participating providers onto the same level of health IT adoption.
As the final stage of the EHR Incentive Programs takes shape,the possibility of widespread health information exchange, population health management, and clinical analytics will become a tantalizing prospect for healthcare providers seeking the tools and competencies required to succeed in a rapidly changing environment.
“In this Stage 3 proposed rule, we build on the groundwork established in the Stage 1 and Stage 2 final rules, including continuing our goal started under Stage 2 to increase interoperable health data sharing among providers,” the document states. “In addition, this Stage 3 proposed rule would also focus on the advanced use of EHR technology to promote improved patient outcomes and health information exchange.”
To accomplish these goals, CMS has made some of the following proposals:
READ MORE: Adult Vaccine Project Produces Population Health Best Practices
• Stage 3 will include a single set of meaningful use objectives and measures, which would replace the staggered attestation stages currently in use. All eligible providers (EPs) or eligible hospitals (EHs) would report on the same measures in 2018 regardless of how long they have been participating in the EHR Incentive Programs.
• Reporting periods for meaningful use will be aligned with the calendar year starting in 2017, reducing confusion over the 90-day initial attestation deadlines.
• Meaningful use will be further aligned with other quality reporting programs, such as the Hospital Inpatient Quality Reporting (IQR) and Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS), in order to reduce administrative complexity.
• Any measures in Stage 1 and Stage 2 that include paper-based workflows or manual chart abstraction will be entirely transitioned to EHR reporting in Stage 3 meaningful use. Measures that are no longer deemed useful to gauge clinical quality and provider performance will also be phased out.
• Providers will continue to have the option to electronically submit clinical quality measures (CQMs) through 2017. In 2018, electronic CQM reporting will be a requirement.
READ MORE: Gates Invests $50M in Big Data, Precision Medicine for Alzheimer’s
• The payment adjustments finalized in the Stage 2 rule will be carried through to Stage 3. Participants will still be able to apply for hardship exemptions if they face significant technical barriers to health IT adoption, experience a natural disaster, are too new as a facility to meet meaningful use requirements, or if an eligible provider does not directly see patients, practices at multiple facilities, or has no control over the availability of certified EHR technology during more than half of his or her encounters.
• Providers will be able to attest to meaningful use using 2014 Certified EHR Technology (CEHRT) between the 2015 and 2017 reporting periods. Providers may upgrade to the optional 2015 CEHRT criteria during that time, but are not required to use 2015 CEHRT systems until the 2018 reporting period. During and after 2018, the 2015 CEHRT criteria will become mandatory for attestation.
The objectives and measures for the final stage of the EHR Incentive Programs contain a number of provisions that heighten the focus on population health management, care coordination, and the use of standardized data in pursuit of more widespread use of health information exchange.
One measure will attempt to improve care coordination by requiring providers on the receiving end of a patient transfer or referral to actively incorporate the patient’s summary of care document into their electronic health record. Providers must perform medication reconciliation, ensure that allergy notes are up to date, and develop a current problem list. “This proposal is designed to complete the electronic transmission loop and support providers in using CEHRT to support the multiple roles a provider plays in meaningful health information exchange,” CMS says.
Another analytics-minded feature of Stage 3 comes from the proposed 2015 CEHRT criteria, which hopes to foster the creation of a system-wide Common Clinical Data Set (CCDS), which includes all the required data elements already present in the Stage 2 summary of care document, as well as the standards required for structure data capture of each element.
READ MORE: What Does “Pick Your Own Pace” MACRA Mean for Data Analytics?
The CCDS is a major part of the ONC’s 10-year interoperability roadmap, intended as a way to provide the “learning health system” with a structured, standardized pool of clinical data that can be used for medical research and population health management. While the ONC is still working on the 2015 CEHRT requirements, CMS notes that additional data elements, such as unique device identifiers (UDIs) for implantable medical devices, may also be included in the basic data element requirements for health information exchange under Stage 3.
Added to information coming from electronic CQM reporting that provide information on clinical performance, the healthcare industry will be creating a vast storehouse of clean and interoperable data.
And if every eligible provider adopts the same sophisticated level of EHR technology by 2018, the industry will theoretically have a level playing field on two critical fronts: they will have the standardized data to work with and they will also have the infrastructure to make meaningful clinical analytics possible at scale…if the vendor community and the ONC’s certification processes work together to implement open and interoperable data standards in all new EHR technology.
That is not yet a sure bet, since the industry still has a great deal of work to do when it comes to liberating its data, and providers are pretty tired of upgrading their EHRs when they are still not guaranteed to find a usable package that improves their productivity instead of sapping their time and energy. Even CMS admits that the slow, unwieldy, and insufficient CEHRT process has gotten them in hot water before, and that it must be changed in order to allow providers adequate time and incentive to invest, install, and implement new EHR systems.
CMS and the ONC will be taking a slower approach this time by giving providers more flexibility with their EHR systems, but Stage 3’s emphasis on data exchange and care coordination – along with a growing recognition that health IT interoperability is vital for participation in accountable care reimbursement arrangements – may finally give providers the tools, support, and guidance they need to come together around population health management and analytics that support coordinated, value-based care.
CMS and the ONC hope that 2017 will be a blockbuster year for healthcare reform. Not only will the industry be well on its way to meeting its 2025 interoperability goals, but it will also be nearing the deadline for at least 50 percent of Medicare reimbursements to be paid through value-based arrangements. By bringing Stage 3 meaningful use to that mix, rulemakers hope to complete the trifecta with more demanding clinical quality requirements, greater emphasis on health information exchange, and firmer penalties for non-compliance.
Will it all add up to the seamless, data-driven, interoperable healthcare continuum that providers were promised at the start of the EHR Incentive Programs? It’s far too early to tell, of course.
But leading organizations with the time and budgets to invest in health IT infrastructure are already making strides towards interoperability and the use of big data analytics to drive better outcomes and higher quality care. If Stage 3 is able to bring those advanced health IT capabilities to more providers in a measured and workable way, the industry may find itself in a very good place by the end of the decade as care coordination, health information exchange, and population health management continue to drive down costs and raise the quality of the patient experience.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureMeaningful UsePopulation Health Management


