WellPoint to give bonuses for standard cancer treatment plans

May 28, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 28, 2014 - Personalized medicine?  Not if you want to make an extra $350 a month, WellPoint, Inc. is telling oncologists.  The insurer will be offering a financial incentive for each patient who is put on one of the payer’s recommended regimens for breast, lung, and colorectal cancer, reports the Wall Street Journal, in an effort to standardize treatment plans.  In an era of healthcare where genomics guides individualized treatments and patients demand a higher level of personal attention from dedicated care teams, the scheme is provoking conflicting opinions among physicians who want the best for their patients – and maybe the best for themselves, as well.
“Oncologist reimbursement at the moment is a broken system,” said Richard Schilsky, Chief Medical Officer of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.  While the WellPoint plan contains “many of the important elements you’d like to see” in a novel reimbursement strategy, the tension between personalized medicine and standardized care is tangible, he says.
WellPoint estimates that its program will save around $5.4 billion per year, or 3% to 4% of all cancer treatment costs.  While some physicians believe the clinical guidelines are “reasonable,” others noted that some routinely used drugs were left off the lists. Cleveland Clinic will be participating in the program “where it makes sense,” said Taussig Cancer Institute Chairman Brian J. Bolwell.  “We generally don’t like to practice by insurance company.  We practice by patient,” he said.
Cigna, UnitedHealthcare, and several other payers have instituted similar programs to eliminate waste and streamline physician decision making, but as medical research increasingly points out the influence of unique genetic fingerprints on the predisposition or aggressiveness of certain cancers, ensuring that the clinical pathways provided by payers are varied and adequate enough to encompass variations may be difficult. Will physicians stop being experimental and daring if trying a novel regimen means giving up a financial reward?
Dig Deeper
Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
CMS Reform Model Fosters Care Coordination, Population Health
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
“There are always going to be unique clinical situations,” acknowledges Jennifer Malin, a WellPoint medical director who oversees oncology.  The recommendations will be updated each quarter, she added, and will only apply to about 85% of patients.  There will be no penalties for oncologists who veer from the guidelines, but there will also be no checks in the mail.
While WellPoint asserts that the approach will work with new advances in genetic medicine and ultimately trim waste from the healthcare system, it will be interesting to see the ultimate result of trying to push financially-motivated standardized treatments and innovative accountable care reforms at the same time.
Tagged Accountable CareHealthcare Business IntelligenceMedical Research


