Mayo: Cancer patients seeking surgeons should go to specialists

May 29, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 29, 2014 - Colorectal cancer patients who sought the attention of specialist surgeons had a higher rate of long-term survival and overall better outcomes, found a study by David Etzioni, MD, a Mayo Clinic colorectal surgeon.  Published in Cancer this month, Etzioni’s study found that surgeons with specialized training in colorectal cancer issues are few and far between, leaving patients to choose between traveling long distances for care or staying local.
“There really is an enormous burden on patients to find the right place to have their operation,” Etzioni says. “A lot of times the pathways by which patients find their surgeon are very informal and it may not always serve the patient well.”
By analyzing patient data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End-results Medicare database, the researchers identified 6432 patients treated by higher-volume colorectal surgeons, higher-volume hospitals, teaching hospitals, and Comprehensive Cancer Centers designated by the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  Patients treated by board-certified colorectal surgeons in higher-volume facilities and those treated by NCI-approved cancer centers had better overall outcomes and longer survival times than those receiving care in generalized organizations.
“Based on an iterative approach to modeling the interactions between these various factors, we found a robust effect of surgeon subspecialty status, hospital volume, and NCI designation,” the study notes. “Surgeon volume was not distinctly associated with long-term survival. These differences persist after adjustment for a broad range of patient and contextual risk factors. Patients and payers can use these results to identify surgeons and hospitals where outcomes are most favorable.”
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
“All of Us” Precision Medicine Program Enters Beta Testing
Research Collaboration to Use Big Data for Diabetes Prevention
“Patients, providers, and payers who are interested in better long term outcomes should be directed to surgeons and hospitals with a focused expertise in rectal cancer treatment,” Dr. Etzioni said.  But NCI cancer centers and specialized surgeons are often located exclusively in larger, more urban areas, he added, making it difficult for rural patients or those in outlying regions to access the best possible facilities.
Colorectal cancer is diagnosed in more than 131,000 people per year, according to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), and kills more than 52,000.  African-American patients are significantly more likely to be diagnosed with the disease, and screening rates are generally low in areas outside of the Northeastern United States.  However, increased attention to providing primary care screenings for the cancer has succeeded in lowering overall mortality trends over the past decade by approximately three percent.
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation Health Management


