Can Better Financial Data Management Save $375 Billion a Year?

January 14, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 14, 2015 - Simplifying the process of billing and financial data management in the healthcare industry could save up to $375 billion per year in unnecessary costs, claims a new study published in BMC Health Services Research, which amounts to approximately 15% of total healthcare spending in the United States.  The massive reduction in costs would require a thorough overhaul of how financial data is created, transmitted, and used from its start in the physician’s office through its journey to payers and back again.  The maximum savings would only be achieved by the adoption of a single nationwide payer system, an unlikely prospect for the country at this time.
However, with the approach of ICD-10 putting revenue cycle management and financial analytics in the spotlight, the research suggests that the industry can take some steps towards administrative simplification that would make some progress towards cutting significant costs.
A team of health policy researchers from a number of institutions wished to examine the enormous burden that billing and insurance related (BIR) costs are placing on a health system already strained by the clinical weight of chronic disease management, overutilization, poor care coordination, and an aging population.  Administrative costs more than doubled as a percentage of healthcare spending between 1980 and 2010, the study says, as more complex relationships between payers and providers continue to develop.  As payers attempt to take more control over what services providers deliver, costs related to prior authorizations, claims, and managed care have spiked administrative spending.
According to the research, BIR costs totaled over $470 billion in 2012, with physician practices incurring $70 billion of those costs, hospitals another $74 billion, and additional health service and supply companies $94 billion.  On the payer side, public insurers such as Medicare and Medicaid spent $35 billion, while the private insurance industry contributed a whopping $198 billion in paperwork.  BIR costs account for 18% of total healthcare spending.  After adding 9.4% of spending for non-BIR administration, that leaves less than 75% of the nation’s healthcare dollars for actual clinical care.  If BIR costs were reduced and the funding redistributed, the majority of uninsured Americans could receive adequate healthcare coverage while easily remaining within current spending levels.
Dig Deeper
Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
Revenue Cycle Analytics Enable Value-Based Care for Pediatrics Group
Why Healthcare Should Study Up on Lessons Learned in Fintech
However, the researchers argue, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, which intended to increase insurance coverage and improve access to care, may contribute to the administrative cost conundrum if the nation’s private insurance system is not overhauled.  Accountable care and pay-for-performance reimbursement structures may provider more patient-centered care, but also require private insurers to become increasingly involved in care decisions, inflating BIR costs even more.
“While it was hoped that the ARRA’s incentives for adoption of health information technology would reduce costs, partly by streamlining billing and administration, savings have not materialized,” the study adds.  “Indeed, it appears that HIT will impose hefty implementation and training costs, and may require ongoing expenditures for IT upgrades and maintenance.”
The solution, suggested continually for more than a decade by a succession of Congressmen, would be to mimic the single-payer systems currently in use in several other countries such as Canada.  If the United States took its cues from the Canadian system, the country could see that $375 billion in annual savings, totaling more than a trillion in reduced costs over just three years.
“Though some argue that shifting to a single payer system could propagate unintended financial hazards (i.e., overutilization) and inefficiencies…utilization controls can be employed in simplified financing systems while also keeping BIR costs down,” the study argues.  “Moreover, evidence from the US Medicare program and the systems of several other countries demonstrates that large, unified payers can achieve significantly greater efficiencies than multi-payer systems. Unified payment schemes enjoy economies of scale, sharply reduce the burdens of claims processing, and obviate the need for marketing, advertising and underwriting expenses.”
However, as the healthcare industry continues to struggle with currently mandated reforms and upgrades, such as EHR adoption, meaningful use, and ICD-10, most of which seem relatively small in comparison with snuffing out the private insurance industry, the likelihood of adopting a single-payer system any time soon is remote.
Relying on better financial analytics, data automation, and revenue cycle management alone, the industry may achieve savings of $40 billion per year, which is not insignificant, and is a worthy goal for healthcare organizations seeking to do the best they can with what they have as they fight to retain financial solvency, provide high quality care, and leverage health IT in the current climate of widespread change.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureFinancial AnalyticsRevenue Cycle Management


