ONC population health contest hopes to cut hypertension

July 09, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 09, 2014 - The Office of the National Coordinator is challenging providers to use their EHRs, clinical decision support systems, and population health management techniques to reduce hypertension quickly and efficiently among high-risk patients. The challenge hopes to drive innovation and spread best practices for hypertension control to other providers in a simple and repeatable way.
“The goal of the EHR Innovations for Improving Hypertension Challenge is to seek practices that have used clinical decision support (CDS) to implement the most clinically successful examples of an evidence-based blood pressure treatment protocol, gather details about these tools and their implementation, and then drive widespread implementation of those tools by other providers,” the notice says.
The first phase of the contest requires providers to achieve more than 70% control of blood pressure among its patients using quality measures already in place for the Physician Reporting Quality System (PQRS) program.  Participants must also demonstrate significant improvement over time for patients, and indicate the percentage of the patient population who achieved better BP rates based on the utilization of registries, patient reminders, EHR documentation, and clinical decision support tools.  ONC will pick up to four winners of a $5,000 cash prize.
The second stage of the contest, for which there is a single $30,000 prize, will require providers to demonstrate that the population health management principles described in phase one have been successfully taught to and implemented in at least two other practices or provider groups.  Entrants will be judged on the number of practices that have successfully adopted the hypertension control program, the comprehensiveness and innovation involved in the clinical decision support and population health management protocols, and the likelihood that the submitter’s approach to hypertension control can be replicated at scale.  Phase 2 participants need not have applied for Phase 1, the notice says.
Dig Deeper
Humana Pins Social Determinants of Health to Better Quality of Life
Clinical Decision Support May Boost ID of Chronic Kidney Disease
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
The Phase 1 submission period is currently open and extends until October 6, 2014.  Winners will be announced on October 27, 2014.  Phase 2 will begin the following day, and ONC will accept entries through July 31, 2015.  The Phase 2 winners will be announced in the fall of 2015.  For more information on applying for the contest, see the full announcement here.
  Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


