PCORI will speed analytics with $93.5M in research funding

December 19, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 19, 2013 - The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) is prescribing a financial shot in the arm for medical research this month after announcing an enormous grant to fund a brand new clinical research network.  PCORI board member and Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Dr. Francis Collins announced the new funding in a blog post this week as a way to speed up the process of conducting clinical trials and providing advances in personalized medicine to needy patients.
“Both patients and researchers are often frustrated by the agonizingly slow pace at which many comparative effectiveness research (CER) studies proceed,” Collins wrote. “Rather than starting from scratch for each CER trial, it would be far more efficient if researchers could tap into networks that include millions of patients—of all ages, ethnicities, and socioeconomic strata—who have agreed to participate in research.  If these patients all have electronic medical records, that’s even better, making it possible to extract data quickly for a particular observational or interventional trial.”
The newly-minted National Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network, also known as PCORnet, will consist of two types of networks.  The first will be Clinical Data Research Networks, which include academic medical centers, health plans, private EHR vendors, and VA clinics, which will use existing EHR infrastructures to collect and develop data sets for large-scale research.  The second will be Patient-Powered Research Networks, run by disease-specific advocacy groups charged with outreach to help enroll individuals and collect standardized data for conditions ranging from cardiovascular disease to muscular dystrophy.
“These groups will use the funds to conduct pilot projects aimed at creating, enabling, and testing common data models over the next 18 months,” Collins says. “A previously funded coordinating center will oversee this complex start-up. If all these efforts prove successful, the network has the potential to expand to more than 100 million people all across the United States.”  PCORI will distribute the $93.5 million in funding to 11 clinical data groups and 18 patient networks.
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
“All of Us” Precision Medicine Program Enters Beta Testing
“NIH is thrilled that these organizations have come together and agreed to create a single, overarching network that will be seamlessly integrated using electronic databases,” Collins concludes. “But the real excitement will come once we see this network in action: helping to speed efforts by clinical researchers to test the treatments and cures that so many people urgently need.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig DataClinical AnalyticsClinical DataClinical IntelligenceMedical ResearchPatient Data


