Care Quality Tops Expenses for Patients Seeking Physicians

November 25, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Forty-two percent of patients now use online reviews to judge a provider’s listening skills, office environment, and care quality.
November 25, 2014 - Nearly half of patients would be willing to potentially spend more money to go out of their insurance coverage network if it meant seeing a physician with higher quality scores and better patient reviews, according to new survey data from Software Advice, which clearly illustrates the importance with which patients see care quality.  With the use of physician review sites jumping by 68% over the past year, healthcare organizations must be aware that the patient experience is more important than ever for determining loyalty, engagement, and revenue.
Online reviews are becoming an increasingly impactful factor in the way consumers make decisions about everything from televisions to vacation spots.  It’s no surprise, then, that patients who are being asked to bear a larger and larger portion of the costs of healthcare from their own pockets are looking to get their money’s worth.  Unlike other products and services, which tend to attract reviews primarily from unhappy consumers, patients are likely to log on to give their doctors a thumbs-up, and are generally positive about their experiences.
The review site Yelp, more typically known for restaurant critiques, is actually the most popular place for patients to talk about their physicians, too.  Twenty-seven percent of patients who leave reviews do so on Yelp, followed closely by 26% who will post comments to Healthgrades.  RateMDs also attracted about a quarter of reviewers.  All three sites also scored highly for trustworthiness, which is important to the 61% of patients who browse online reviews before selecting a physician.
Patients are looking to glean information about care quality above all other aspects of the healthcare experience, the survey found, followed by remarks on the patient experience.  About a quarter of patients are seeking demographic information on physicians, such as languages spoken or gender, which may help them have a more comfortable consult.
Dig Deeper
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
What is the New Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Program?
When asked to dive more deeply into how reviews help to illuminate care quality, 34% of the participants stated that the ability to give an accurate diagnosis was the most important thing they look for in a physician’s reviews.  Twenty-two percent said that listening skills were also highly important, while slightly fewer were most concerned about the physician’s ability to explain things back to them.  Perhaps surprisingly for physicians who complain that they don’t have enough face-to-face time with patients, the amount of time spent in the room with a clinician was only a top concern for about fifteen percent.
Patients may be comfortable with only spending ten minutes with their physicians, but they don’t want to wait around for it.  Consumers search reviews for evidence that they may be camping out in the waiting room, and a quarter of users marked “long wait times” as one of their top concerns.  Staff friendliness, ease of scheduling, and smooth billing and payment processes also ranked among the administrative issues that may sway a patient away from a new provider.
Providers who are on the receiving end of a negative review may be tempted to take it as a personal attack by a patient who had a bad outcome and wants to vent, but patients generally see their remarks as a way to help other patients get the best possible experience from their healthcare.

A third of patients will disregard an overly negative review if it seems exaggerated or unreasonable.  Close to twenty percent are likely to disregard a bad review if the physician replies thoughtfully to the discontented comment.  Providers may wish, however, to respond in a forum that is less open to misinterpretation in order to avoid coming off as combative, condescending, or otherwise off-putting to an internet audience.
By posting online reviews at record rates, patients are doing exactly what healthcare providers have been asking them to do: taking their care into their own hands by giving their peers decision-making tools based on their own experiences.  This level of patient engagement may be frustrating to providers who cannot control what is said about them online, but healthcare organizations that use review sites as teaching tools may be able to improve their own processes and attract more patients with higher levels of quality care.
Tagged Accountable CarePatient EngagementQuality Of Care


