Cerner buys Siemens to boost population health, RCM assets

August 07, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 07, 2014 - EHR interoperability may have just taken a big step forward with Cerner’s announcement of its $1.3 billion acquisition of Siemens Health Services.  The move will combine two of the biggest health IT companies in the American market with an eye towards the future of population health management and the business intelligence needs of providers eager to embrace electronic solutions for their most pressing organizational needs.   The acquisition will be “setting the stage for a new era” in health IT, says Cerner President Zane Burke, looking beyond the basics of meaningful use and towards the industry-wide standardization of data that is necessary for true interoperability.
“This is a great opportunity for us to improve interoperability, and we have certainly been very strong in our interoperability statement,” Burke told EHRintelligence. “We’ll see a fair amount of that. Also, moving to the next layer, it’s about population health and the ability to get information from disparate EHRs and be able to feed that information back into the clinician’s workflow. That’s incredibly important. We actually think we’re going to be one positioned to be able to do that work. This is a play not just for the EHR world. It’s setting the stage for a new era.”
With Siemens in hand, Cerner will add to its imaging and lab management products, an area where Siemens has excelled in the market.  The Siemens Soarian suite will be supported and updated for at least the next decade, according to the press release, and Cerner will work hard to gain the trust of current Siemens customers to smooth the transition.  “We have tremendous respect for Siemens’ clients, their markets and their needs,” said Neal Patterson, Cerner chairman, CEO and co-founder.  “We look forward to bringing them into the Cerner family, especially as they face increasingly complex clinical and regulatory environments, with mandates to improve quality and pressures to lower cost.”
“By strengthening its product portfolio, Cerner will be able to take on the competition not only from the established vendors, but also from upcoming vendors vying for a share in emerging areas in health IT such as population health management, big data and proactive care management,” says Frost & Sullivan Healthcare IT Research Analyst Shruthi Parakkal. “This acquisition is not just an organic business development route for Cerner, but has to be seen as a stepping stone supporting its strategy of positioning itself as an end-to-end player in the evolving health IT markets globally.”
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


