ICD-10 Prep Raises Data Quality for Revenue, Population Health

February 09, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 09, 2015 - ICD-10 has danced in and out of the spotlight over the past few years as delay after delay has dampened a sense of urgency about the implementation of the new code sets. But with October 1, 2015 looking like a very serious contender for a real go-live date, healthcare organizations are running out of time to raise the quality of their clinical documentation to meet ICD-10’s more stringent standards. While the costs and impacts of this long-term preparation has been contentious, health information management professionals have had one thing in mind since the very beginning: ICD-10 is a catalyst for more granular, detailed data in the healthcare industry, and the effects of clinical documentation improvement will be felt far downstream.
Kathy Johnson, RHIA, Vice President and General Manager of Data Quality and Coding Compliance at Care Communications, is already seeing a shift in the way the industry views its data from her role as an ICD-10 consultant and coding audit expert. ICD-10 may be the immediate focus as October draws near, she told HealthITAnalytics, but healthcare organizations have additional goals in mind as the calendar counts down to implementation.
“We’re starting to move away from coding for DRGs or coding for this specific reimbursement or that specific amount,” she said. “Now, we’re looking at that data as meaningful for analysis and directing value-based purchasing or more of a focus on population health management than what we’ve seen in the past. With my clients, I’m starting to work with them more in trying to envision what they’re going to need in the near future to bridge their needs related to their data and how they will be using that effectively within their organization.”
“Competing initiatives” is a term often heard throughout an industry in flux, with Stage 2 meaningful use still very much a challenge for providers of all sizes, a new push towards accountable care threatening to disrupt revenue cycles, and care quality penalties beginning to squeeze budgets. The surprise ICD-10 delay of 2014 seemed like a godsend to many providers with too much on their plates, but organizations that pushed ICD-10 aside entirely may not have done themselves much of a favor in the long run.
“We saw most people get kind of frozen and halt last year after the ICD-10 delay in the spring,” Johnson agreed. “They didn’t know what to do or what direction to go. But as 2014 progressed, there was a small group that said, ‘We’re going to stay the course. We’re going to continue as we planned. This will serve us well.’”
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
“And I think that’s the message I try to convey to people more and more. I want to help them appreciate that what they’re doing to prepare for ICD-10 improves the quality of their data today. There are so many other changes occurring in the industry where the completeness and the quality of data becomes essential to an organization’s well-being. Investing in things that will improve that data shouldn’t just be driven by timeline of ICD-10.”
It’s becoming more difficult to view population health management as a separate project from the other initiatives vying for time and dollars. Instead, it forms the basis for all other healthcare reform, including accountable care, quality-based reimbursement, the EHR Incentive Programs, and more. And the foundation for population health management is high quality data that gives providers an insight into patient behavior, risk, outcomes, and satisfaction.
“We’ve come to a point where we’re doing more than just appreciating collecting a robust database in theory,” Johnson said. “Providers are seeing that we really need to capture both the disparity and the acuity of the patients that we’re treating, and we need to do a good job of tracking the services that we’re delivering so that we accurately reflect the population we’re serving and who we should be serving. That means collecting data differently, and that means coding differently. A much more complete code set is needed.”
Bulking up an organization’s data set is not without it pitfalls, of course. ICD-10 may not be quite as costly as some naysayers have predicted, but it is still a time-intensive proposition that requires expert leadership, robust education, and lots and lots of practice. While coders who are given the opportunity to practice with ICD-10 can bounce back from lower productivity levels in time, Johnson acknowledges that collecting and coding more complete data will sap a few hours from the clock.
“Not too long ago, I was looking at the productivity of our coding staff and our auditing staff,” she explained. “I was seeing a hit on our productivity, and I wanted to know what was going on. When we do an audit, we audit what a client has coded. It was taking longer for us to complete that process. Well, what we discovered was the issue was the number of codes to be audited on any individual case had increased. We went back just two years and tallied the number of codes that we averaged for a claim from two years ago versus what was collected in 2014. There was a dramatic increase in the number of codes collected. Just taking the time to code secondary diagnoses has increased about 20 percent to 25 percent.”
READ MORE: Laying the Groundwork for Actionable Healthcare Analytics
Is it worth it? The answer may not be clear until the industry swallows the bitter pill and starts to see the results from an actual transition. But the preparation period has brought valuable lessons of its own. One of those lessons is the shortfall of current clinical documentation, which has suffered its own rocky journey as providers continue to struggle with implementing and optimizing their EHR systems.
“While many people recognize clinical documentation improvement (CDI) as valuable and necessary for ICD-10 coding, its real importance is helping to get us away from what we’ve tolerated as ‘unspecified’ when we could really get down to a better code and a more meaningful codified data set,” Johnson says. “I don’t think there’s any harm for anyone under ICD-9 to have clear documentation, so I encourage people to begin those work efforts, whether they believe ICD-10 will go live October 1st or not. I think those clients that have continued to stay the course with ICD-10 preparation are seeing the value in that. For many of our organizations, it’s appreciating a more collaborative approach to getting both the documentation and the accurate code set that develops over time with that.”
“One of the things that we have seen as a secondary benefit with our training for ICD-10, even for our organizations that have very minimal CDI efforts, is an improvement in their documentation,” she continued. “As the coders worked with it and learned what they were going to need, there was more communication about things that would be helpful in the future. It doesn’t even necessarily happen in a formal way, but it really helps to have that dialog with clinicians about what’s important.”
Some physicians have shown resistance, fear, and distaste for the new codes, and have not always been cooperative when faced with educational programs, queries from CDI experts, and other challenges to a daily routine already packed with patient consults. After all, many providers were promised big gains productivity and the quality of patient care before their EHR implementations as well, and may not be quite so inclined to believe the hype twice.
“Some people have found the EHR to be a wonderful tool and really have embraced it, and others still feel it’s a kind of a necessary evil,” Johnson said. “But when we work with our clients on assessing that and helping them improve, many times it’s because they didn’t think about the workflow at the beginning. What they created with their EHR was not something that made it easier for the author of the document, or it didn’t collect additional information that was consistent, or it’s creating more conflicting documentation that a coder has to sift through to figure out where the truth is. So going back and looking at that, I think, will reap significant results.”
READ MORE: Nurse Informaticists Can “Triage” EHR Optimization Problems
“I also think that as EHRs have been implemented, and then reinstalled and refined, that it really is just a tool,” she added. “People have gotten more savvy about collection of data within the EHR, how important that process is in terms of the fields and the design. Who’s collecting the data; who’s the author of the note. They’re really being more mindful of working smarter with that tool.”
“It seems like there’s much to the configuration that didn’t necessarily get addressed when people initially put in their EHRs – just getting it implemented was the important part back then – and now they need to refine it further. We’ve been seeing quite a bit of work in that arena as well, and some of that gets labeled under ICD-10 preparation. But in reality, it’s much bigger than ICD-10.”
Tagged Clinical DataHealth Information ManagementICD-10


