Poor Data Governance Practices Restrict Usefulness of EHRs

March 02, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 02, 2015 - The widespread implementation of electronic health records has brought about some of the most significant changes in the practice of medicine for decades, but the usefulness of these health information management systems can be inhibited by poor data governance practices, unclear or overly complicated workflows, and badly designed software.  In an article published this month in the Journal of AHIMA, Mary Butler outlines some of the key data governance issues that can limit the positive impact of EHRs while frustrating staff and putting patient safety at risk.
“Accounts of mistaken identity, anecdotally at least, seem to happen to everyone at least once in the healthcare realm with both paper and electronic records,” Butler writes. “But in an increasingly electronic world employing electronic health record (EHR) systems and other health IT where patients are presenting with more complicated cases than ever, small errors have high-stakes consequences.”
One of the most common data governance errors is “cloning,” or the act of copying and pasting blocks of text from one field to another.  While this time saver can help shave minutes off the process of recording a patient’s past history, it is all too easy – and shockingly common – to paste a paragraph into the wrong patient’s record.  A 2013 study found that 78 percent of clinicians routinely copy and paste more than 20 percent of their notes.  Ninety-four percent of physicians returning from vacation days will copy information from previously authored documentation, and the cloned text comprises more than half of the new note.
While some argue that copying previously vetted information can actually reduce the chance for transcription errors, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) both condemn the practice that may open opportunities for fraud, increase the risk of patient safety problems, and work against the notion of personalized care and attention to patients.  Some Medicare administrative contractors (MACs) won’t even pay for patient claims that include cloned documentation, which can have a significant impact on revenue cycle management if the practice is widespread within an organization.
But cloning is just one of many data governance challenging facing health information management professionals in today’s digital environment.  The need to rely on potentially harmful shortcuts indicates a deeper problem with the way EHRs are designed, implemented, and optimized, the article says.  These problems often stem from the fact that many organizations rushed their EHR purchases and implementations in order to qualify for the maximum amount of meaningful use incentives, leaving them with systems that don’t quite work the way they thought they would.
READ MORE: Preventing Big Data Pain Points During a Healthcare Encounter
“HIM is dealing with many EHR errors that are very difficult to correct, if not impossible,” says Butler. “While the EHR has advanced healthcare by improving the access and exchange of digital health records, some basic errors that were not present or tolerated in the paper record are rampant in EHRs.”
Physicians have complained since the beginning of the EHR Incentive Programs that software products are not designed with real clinical workflows in mind.  They require an exorbitant number clicks, check boxes, and buttons, stifle the natural flow of the physician’s thought process, provide too many pop-ups and alerts, and don’t even allow clinical staff to access vital patient health information when necessary at the point of care.
Many of these problems are likely to persist for years into the future as the healthcare industry comes to grips with what it means to be an interoperable care continuum, and HIM professionals will be at the forefront of that discussion.
A large number of healthcare providers are currently going through the difficult and expensive decision to rip out these faulty, first generation EHRs and replace them with new technology that is more intuitive, more flexible, and more suitable to the type of complex data governance necessary for healthcare’s new objectives.  Not only must EHRs be able to quickly and accurately record basic patient information without the threat of confusion and mistakes, but they must also allow healthcare providers to engage in clinical analytics or population health management activities that are among the ultimate goals of the EHR Incentive Programs.
“HIM practitioners on the whole agree that EHRs are worth the trouble it takes to make them function properly. They’re also the ones leading their organizations to maximize EHRs benefits, which highlights the need and demand for HIM professionals,” Butler concludes.  “How does the healthcare industry fix its EHR issues? Focus less on technology and systems and more on training people and better using current systems, according to some HIM professionals. Healthcare is better off with EHRs, but the systems have a long ways to go before the healthcare industry starts seeing benefits.”
  Tagged EHR UseHealth Information ManagementHealthcare Data Governance


