Quality care relies on clinical, administrative cooperation

May 22, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 22, 2014 - Healthcare organizations may be investing in clinical analytics, business intelligence solutions, revenue cycle management tools, and robust quality improvement programs, but all the technology in the world might not help as much as a strong, human leadership team and a commitment to working together to achieve strategic goals. Engaging physicians in leadership roles to bridge the gaps between the clinical and administrative branches of an organization can help to foster understanding, communication, and ultimately produce higher quality care, says American College of Physician Executives (ACPE) President and CEO Peter Angood, MD, FRCS(C), FACS, FCCM.
“A well-trained clinical leader knows and understands the administrative side, but has a strong appreciation for how those non-clinical administrators have been trained and what their perspectives are,” Angood said to HealthITAnalytics. “Similarly, for the non-clinical leaders and managers, they recognize that they don’t have that detailed clinical insight. They know about the industry, but they don’t know how to look after patients, and they understand that. They respect that, and they actually look towards the clinical leaders to provide that buffer, if you will, of strengthening the overall leadership and management.”
“You would think that there might be tension between the two areas, but in fact at the highest levels, we – the American College of Physician Executives and the American College of Healthcare Executives, where most all of the nonclinical leaders hang out – we have a good strong relationship and have begun doing some activities together to help make that relationship even stronger moving forward,” he added.
Those strong relationships are a critical part of an organization’s ability to move forward with the significant changes required by a myriad of healthcare reform initiatives. With the Affordable Care Act (ACA) bringing millions of new patients into a system already straining to handle a rapidly expanding number of Medicare beneficiaries with complex chronic diseases, and CMS quality initiatives pinning big penalties onto hospitals who can’t reduce readmissions and infections, pulling together may be the only way some hospitals will survive.
Dig Deeper
Big Data Shows Gender-Based Medical Error, Patient Safety Patterns
Top Healthcare Business Intelligence Companies by Hospital Users
EHR, Lab Data Support Pediatric AKI Analytics Dashboard
But healthcare organizations shouldn’t lose focus, Angood says, on the ultimate reason that they are in business. “Healthcare, at the end of the day, is all about people, and the product of health care is patient care. So while it sounds trite at times, the central focus should always be patient-centered care,” he said. “All health care systems should be centrally focused on patient-centered care. In order to get the best outcomes and the best delivery, health systems should be looking for the ways that they can optimally organize themselves around the clinicians as well as around the administrators who have the strengths to deliver the best care.”
“Some of the more technical pieces of the administrative side of things, such as running the finances and some of the human resources issues, staffing models, et cetera – those, I think, are better managed by those professionals who are educated and trained in those areas. But the physician leaders should still have strong awareness of those aspects of the industry and be able to work with those types of administrative leaders to further improve the overall processes.”
“We’re passing a stage where there’s been strong implementation of a lot of EHRs and information technology platforms, but we’re also in a phase where some of those have had to be retooled. The reason that has happened is because there was not enough attention involving the clinicians and the different practitioners in evaluating the systems and the processes of care. So it’s vitally important that clinicians be involved in the design and implementation of the technology platforms because it has to reflect what optimal patient care is.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHospital QualityQuality Of Care


