CDC: Improved care could prevent 258,000 annual deaths

May 05, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 05, 2014 - More than a quarter of a million people die from preventable conditions each year, says a new population health report from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), representing a significant opportunity for providers to fine tune their chronic disease management programs and community outreach activities.  The five leading causes of death between 2008 and 2010 were heart disease, cancer, chronic respiratory conditions, stroke, and unintentional injuries, claiming more than 895,000 lives and comprising 66% of all annual deaths.
“Examining which diseases and injuries result in the greatest number of deaths in populations, particularly for deaths that occur earlier than expected, allows health officials to establish disease prevention goals, priorities, and strategies,” the report says.  “Reducing the number of earlier than expected deaths from the leading causes of death requires risk factor reduction, screening, early intervention, and successful treatment of the disease or injury.”
“The majority of these risk factors do not occur randomly in populations; they are closely aligned with the social, demographic, environmental, economic, and geographic attributes of the neighborhoods in which people live and work,” the report continues, noting that the calculations are based on state rankings, patient age stratification, and benchmarking populations against the states with the lowest numbers of preventable deaths, representing goal marks for other geographical areas.
Dig Deeper
Stress, Depression Negatively Impact Chronic Disease Management
Big Data Analytics Link Economic Wellness to Population Health
Gates Foundation Grants $279M to UW Population Health Program
To reduce the number of preventable deaths, the CDC suggests that providers engage in more aggressive screening activities for common risk factors like tobacco use, high blood pressure, lack of physical activity, and poor nutrition, which can lead to several of the leading causes of mortality.  Understanding the impact of the home, work, and community environments on risk factors such as drug and alcohol use, second-hand smoke, pollutants, and lifestyle factors like a refusal to use seatbelts in vehicles or wear helmets during dangerous recreational activities.
“States can use the disease-specific aspirational goals for potentially preventable deaths presented in this report in several ways,” the study concludes. “They can identify other states with similar populations but better outcomes and examine what those are doing differently to address the leading causes of death. Although each state has a unique set of factors that determine health outcomes, states might find neighboring states or states within their region as good sources of information on effective policies, programs, and services. The goals can also be used to educate state policymakers and leaders about what is achievable if they were able to match the best state outcomes.”
  Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig Data AnalyticsChronic Disease ManagementEHR Patient DatamHealth and Population HealthPopulation Health Management


