Can healthcare model patient engagement on other industries?

June 11, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 11, 2014 - You don’t have to be an avid coupon-clipper to know that getting rewards for taking small actions is a nice feeling.  The idea of earning points, discounts, and free merchandise for allowing yourself to be trained into doing what retailers want is so engrained in the daily economic experience that few consumers even think about it anymore.  But as with so many other areas of business intelligence, the healthcare system has been lagging far behind.  The notion of plying patients with financial incentives for maintaining good health and changing their habits is catching on, however, as pay-for-performance reimbursement models gain steam.  With financial risk shifting to providers, physicians and hospitals are finally realizing that new motivations are required to get patients involved in their own care.
Many payers already provide financial incentives to patients, says Michael Dermer, Chief Incentive Officer at Welltok, encouraging them to visit their primary care providers for screenings, or make lifestyle changes like increasing exercise or losing weight.  But as the financial risk spreads to more stakeholders within the industry, more organizations will need to coordinate with each other to provide meaningful rewards for effective patient engagement.
“We think, in the not-too-distant future, provider organizations themselves will actually be issuing incentives to patients,” Dermer told HealthITAnalytics. “If you think about how providers are now under accountable care models and more risk-bearing models, at the end of the day, it’s ultimately going to benefit them if patients are undertaking lifestyle change and more preventative behavior. If providers are accountable for producing actual results, they want their diabetics, for example, coming in for regular screenings, and they want that diabetic sticking to their medication protocol.”
Adhering to those protocols requires a great deal of effort from the patient, however, and providers are starting to recognize that their responsibility for ensuring that patients are healthy extends far outside the office’s walls.  Providers are the ones shouldering the burden of piecing together all the moving parts of a patient’s overall health, and the puzzle requires a robust behind-the-scenes infrastructure built on harnessing and synthesizing multiple streams of disparate data.
“Think of the suite of assets that are available to help a patient manage her health,” Dermer says.   “That suite of assets is your traditional health and wellness programs, disease management, case management, on-site clinics, and, more recently, some wearable devices like exercise trackers and glucose monitors, and eventually the thing that’s just embedded in your neck, right? What we essentially do is organize and integrate all that data into one platform, so you, as the patient, just get to live your life.”
READ MORE: With New Players Looming, Healthcare Needs Big Data to Support Scale
“If you show up and get your mammogram, if you go for a run and have a wearable device, if you go to your primary care physician, all that data flows to us,” he says of the Welltok platform.  “We like to use this analogy: when you get on an airplane, you don’t really care how your frequent flyer miles move from your credit card or bank account to the airline and how they’re applied to process your ticket.  You just know that you can go on the web and see the record of your transaction the next day.”
“That’s what consumers are used to.  We want them to know that, ‘Hey, I can earn these incentives,’ without worrying about the back-end,” he added.  “We’re actually moving the data in real time, so that the individual, once they’re doing what they’re doing in their daily lives, they’re automatically earning their incentives.”
This seamless integration is commonplace in other industries, but has been slow to get off the ground in healthcare.  The data is there, but the technology is still in the process of becoming integrated into the way providers deliver care.  As the industry starts to look towards other sectors for ideas about modernize and transform its top-down configuration into a cooperative, consumer-centric ecosystem, providers will need to take their cues from their partners in banking or retail who have already gotten things right.
“We really believe that the standard for this stuff should not be set by healthcare,” Dermer said.  “It should be set by your credit card, airline, and hotel loyalty programs, right?  Just the same way that you go into a department store, and buy a pair of shoes, and two minutes later you’ve got 100 points in your account.  The same thing is going to be the standard that’s set for healthcare.  It just happens to be that you’re following your prenatal care instead of going shopping.”
Tagged Accountable CareHealthcare Business IntelligencePatient EngagementPopulation Health Management


