TUSM Announces New Institute to Improve Population Health

August 13, 2015

By Sara Heath
August 13, 2015 - The Temple University Health System is expanding its involvement with population health and health data analytics as it establishes its new Institute for Transformative Medicine, which will be directed by Ralph Horwitz, MD, MACD, according to a recent press release.
The new Institute for Transformative Medicine is hoped to become a hub for innovation by putting all of the University’s research approaches under one roof. The goal is to use this research to make improvements to care by taking a look at population health.
“Our goal for the Institute is to develop a world class program of research and implementation that continuously improves the effectiveness and efficiency of care by generating knowledge and insight at the population level, while improving precision in the application of results from rich, patient-generated data at the individual level,” says Horwitz.
Programs such as the one Horwitz described can be difficult to achieve, but through an understanding of various scientific concepts and their interrelations with each other and the Triple Aim of better healthcare, Horwitz believes this world class program is possible.
Dig Deeper
Geisinger, Baylor Granted $3.5M for Patient Safety Learning Lab
Payers Starting to Tie Precision Medicine to Value-Based Care
Natural Language Processing, AI to Foster Clinical Decision Tools
“To achieve such a program requires greater understanding of several interdependent dynamics: the interactions between individual-level biology and the way that life experience shapes and is shaped by biology; the sustaining forces that create and maintain good health; the nature and complementary roles of different types of data on human biology and human experience; and the strategic priorities to foster attainment of the Triple Aim of better healthcare, better health, and lower cost,” he explains.
All of this work with the Institute is ultimately aimed at the improvement of population health management, specifically in underserved and low-income communities. Horwitz also hopes to identify intervention strategies to improve both individual health and population health as a whole. In order to do this, the Institute will work with Temple medical students, informatics experts, and data analytics experts to identify these key factors in population health.
Temple officials are excited to see Horwitz lead this new Institute due to his impressive resume and reputation as an educator.
“Dr. Horwitz is an outstanding choice to spearhead these new efforts and collaborations,” says Larry R. Kaiser, MD, FACS, President and CEO of Temple University Health System, Dean of Temple University School of Medicine, and Senior Executive Vice President for Health Affairs at Temple University. “He is a leading authority on research methods and a pioneer in the development of clinical epidemiology and outcomes research. His work is notable for its rigor and innovative application of methods to understand clinical phenomena, including the etiology, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of disease.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


