Is the ICD-10 Transition Grace Period Legislation a Necessity?

May 18, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 18, 2015 - As the October 1, 2015 deadline draws nearer, the annual flurry of legislative activity around the ICD-10 transition has been picking up as lawmakers volunteer alternatives to the way the implementation process is currently slated to take place.  As Rep. Ted Poe (R-TX) introduces another attempt to scrap the ICD-10 transition all together, Tennessee Republican Rep. Diane Black has a different solution: allow a “grace period” of 18 months after the transition date during which providers cannot be penalized for using certain ICD-10 codes incorrectly.  But would the bill have a meaningful impact on the ICD-10 transition at all?
Bill HR 2247, also known as the Increasing Clarity for Doctors by Transitioning Effectively Now Act (ICD-TEN Act), won’t just please acronym aficionados if it makes it through the House Energy and Commerce and Ways and Means Committees.  It hopes to give beleaguered providers a significant break on the detail and specificity that is the hallmark of the new code set.  
According to the “safe harbor” provision of the legislation, Medicare would not be allowed to deny a claim based only on the use of an inaccurate ICD-10 code, including improper use of an “unspecified” code that does not sufficiently drill down into the most applicable level of detail.
The bill would also require Medicare to bulk up its ICD-10 end-to-end testing activities by making sure that the percentage of ICD-10 claims accepted by Medicare is equal to the current number of ICD-9 claims that can be successfully processed.  CMS would be required to submit proof to Congress within thirty days of the implementation date that the Medicare fee-for-service system is “fully functioning.”  If it isn’t, CMS would need to outline a plan to ensure that claims are being processed without shorting providers on their anticipated revenue streams.
“In the past, Congress has repeatedly delayed the switch from the ICD-9 coding system to the far more complex ICD-10 system out of concern about the effect on providers,” Black wrote in a letter to her colleagues, according to the Journal of AHIMA. “Neither Congress nor the provider community support kicking the can down the road and supporting another delay, but we must ensure the transition does not unfairly cause burdens and risks to our providers, especially those serving Medicare patients.”
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
“During the ICD-10 transitional period, it is essential for CMS to ensure a fully functioning payment system and institute safeguards that prevent physicians and hospitals from being unfairly penalized due to coding errors,” Black added.
The idea of easing into the ICD-10 transition is nothing new.  The American Medical Association (AMA) made a similar suggestion in 2013, advocating for a two-year grace period in which no claims could be denied due to any specificity-related issue. This was intended to help providers cope with the “sticker shock” of ICD-10, Reid B. Blackwelder, MD, from the American Academy of Family Physicians said at the time.  The AMA was concerned that payers would use a lack of specificity as a “loophole” to avoid paying providers what they should earn, another delegate added.
But AHIMA believes the opposite.  Allowing healthcare organizations to skate by with less-than-optimal specificity may “create an environment that’s ripe for fraud and abuse,” on the provider side, said Margarita Valdez, senior director of congressional relations at AHIMA.  Even providers who have honest intentions may use the leniency to kick the can down the road when it comes to learning how to properly use ICD-10, added AHIMA CEO Lynne Thomas Gordon.
“We are concerned about a proposed 18-month ‘transition period’ which should not serve as a reason for providers to delay properly learning to use the new code set and generating accurate codes supported by high-quality clinical documentation, nor to reduce the effectiveness of audits in curtailing fraud and abuse,” said Thomas Gordon in a statement.
The rules surrounding the use of unspecified codes have been a sore point for healthcare providers since the introduction of ICD-10.  Healthcare organizations have been unsure about their capability to convince physicians to improve their documentation to the degree required for accurate payment, despite clinical documentation improvement frameworks that detail exactly what information is necessary to support accurate coding.
READ MORE: Health Data Analytics a “Competitive Differentiator” for Payers
While a claim that includes a wildly inaccurate subcode should certainly be denied if unsupported by clinical documentation, many providers may be acting under the assumption that ICD-10 forbids the use of any unspecified or general codes are misinformed.  Unspecified codes are still included in the ICD-10 handbook, and for a very good reason: sometimes they are actually the best option for the situation at hand.
In 2013, CMS took pains to clarify the fact that unspecified ICD-10 codes have their place in the clinical documentation process.  In an email update to providers, CMS said the following about the issue:
If a definitive diagnosis has not been established by the end of the encounter, it is appropriate to report codes for sign(s) and/or symptom(s) in lieu of a definitive diagnosis.  When sufficient clinical information isn’t known or available about a particular health condition to assign a more specific code, it is acceptable to report the appropriate “unspecified” code (e.g., a diagnosis of pneumonia has been determined, but not the specific type). 
In fact, unspecified codes should be reported when they are the codes that most accurately reflects what is known about the patient’s condition at the time of that particular encounter.  It would be inappropriate to select a specific code that is not supported by the medical record documentation or conduct medically unnecessary diagnostic testing in order to determine a more specific code.
In short, providers must sufficiently document everything they already know about a diagnosis, but they don’t need to code to a higher level of detail than is clinically possible to determine.  The goal of ICD-10 isn’t to get to the very bottom of the decision tree just for the sake of saying, “I’ve used the most detailed code I can find.”  The new code set is intended to improve accuracy for reimbursement and clinical analytics by allowing providers the opportunity to document procedures and diagnoses to a degree of clarity that has been missing from ICD-9 for nearly four decades.
READ MORE: Mismatched Symptoms Call EHR Data Integrity into Question
And most providers who are at the point of actually coding in ICD-10 are doing it well, CMS has said.  According to the results of its latest round of end-to-end testing over the winter, only six percent of claims were rejected due to an ICD-10 coding error as opposed to some other technical or administrative flaw, and some of those claims may have been purposely miscoded to test the system’s capability to detect an invalid code.
So would a grace period help providers overcome a serious problem with the ICD-10 transition, or would it simply reinforce an inaccurate idea of what unspecified codes are for?  The healthcare industry is still facing some major technical challenges when it comes to ICD-10 implementation, and there is no question that October 1, 2015 will be a difficult date for a large proportion of providers. 
Organizations should already be elbow-deep in clinical documentation improvement programs that address the worst habits of physicians, and health information management staff should be clear with coders and clinicians about what is truly expected from the use of unspecified codes.  
Whether or not the ICD-TEN Act or other proposals make their way through Congress, providers will need to learn how to use ICD-10 to its fullest capacity eventually.  Are lawmakers and other ICD-10 opponents right to try to soften the blow for the healthcare industry, or does getting it right the first time guarantee a higher level of success?  Leave a comment below to join the discussion.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealth Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


