NYU Receives $2.55M Population Health Management Grant

August 13, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 13, 2015 - The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) has awarded Tara Cortes, PhD, RN, FAAN, professor of geriatric nursing and executive director of the Hartford Institute for Geriatric Nursing, a $2.55 million grant to improve population health management and access to primary care services for older adults in the Bronx, the New York University College of Nursing announced this week.
The Geriatrics Workforce Enhancement Program funding will help providers at Montefiore Health System and community aid workers at Regional Aid for Interim Needs, Inc. (R.A.I.N.) better integrate geriatric medicine into primary care for seniors at risk of falling through gaps in the care continuum, as well as those with complex needs surrounding Alzheimer’s disease and dementia.
“This initiative creates a paradigm shift from the traditional perception of primary care as a visit to a doctor to one in which primary care is woven throughout a continuum of locations that extends into the community where care plans can be enhanced to attain better health outcomes through non-traditional interventions,” said Dr. Cortes.
“Being able to collaborate with primary care physicians, subspecialists and caregivers allows us to create comprehensive care plans and resources for geriatric patients and their families,” added Joe Verghese, MBBS, director, Montefiore Einstein Center for the Aging Brain chief, Integrated Divisions of Cognitive & Motor Aging (Neurology) and Geriatrics (Medicine) at Montefiore and Einstein and professor in the Saul R. Korey Department of Neurology and of Medicine at Einstein.
Dig Deeper
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
How Do Population Health, Public Health, Community Health Differ?
LA Housing Program Improves Mental Health, Cuts Hospital Costs
“We are pleased to participate in this important project which will draw upon the expertise of clinicians in the fields of geriatrics, neurology, rehabilitative medicine and psychiatry to inform unmet needs and enable us to strengthen care services for many of our most vulnerable patients.”
The grant will focus on several key areas of population health management for aging adults, including patient engagement and caregiver education, patient-centered care tailored to the needs of older adults, and the integration of community resources into a personalized care program for those in need of help with chronic disease management.
“The education will focus on inter-professional geriatric-specific care, care coordination and the promotion of wellness through the Medicare Annual Wellness Visit and managing chronic disease – specifically heart failure and diabetes,” said Cortes. “Community resources will support wellness behavior and chronic disease management.”
The population health management program will be implemented in five Montefiore Medical Group patient-centered medical homes, as well as in the Montefiore Einstein Center for the Aging Brain and a number of R.A.I.N. community care sites throughout the borough.  Montefiore’s focus on care coordination and advanced clinical research makes it an ideal partner for the program, while R.A.I.N.’s familiarity with the needs of elderly populations in the area and extensive list of elder care services will add to the reach and depth of the project.
“R.A.I.N. is elated to be a partner in this important collaboration, said Dr. Torres, CEO of R.A.I.N. “With the increased life expectancy of New York City’s population and the coming of age of the ‘baby boom’ population, the goals of this initiative are paramount.  R.A.I.N. is pleased to bring its extensive integrated community-based geriatric experience and expertise to facilitate enhanced health outcomes and expand primary care among the aging population.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


