Philips, GE dive into clinical informatics with new businesses

January 28, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 28, 2014 - Two big names are muscling their way into the informatics and health IT game this year as Royal Philips and General Electric both announce forays into the industry.  GE recently announced its purchase of API Healthcare, an analytics firm with a focus on workforce management, while Philips has formed a new Healthcare Informatics Solutions and Services group within its already significant healthcare empire.
“Healthcare systems today are changing the way they operate, how decisions are made and how patients receive care,” said Deborah DiSanzo, chief executive officer, Philips Healthcare. “This requires a significant overhaul of complex organizations, as well as the associated actionable data about each patient population they serve. As we continue to expand the tools, analytics, consulting and support, we are paving the way for providers to transition into more integrated, collaborative care.”
The informatics group will help collaborate with providers seeking solutions for screenings, diagnostics, monitoring, and remote care.  Philips Healthcare North America has also revamped its sales group to focus more on integrated delivery networks.  Jeroen Tas, who has served as chief information officer at the company, will lead the new wing.  Philips has already signed a 15-year agreement with Georgia Regents Medical Center to collaborate on a transition to more patient-centered, coordinated care.
Meanwhile, GE has bolstered its healthcare holdings with the acquisition of API Healthcare, whose services are already used by more than 1600 hospitals and agencies to manage staffing and human resources processes.  The technology giant hopes to provide IT tools to help hospitals increase their business efficiencies in order to save money and provide quality care.
Dig Deeper
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
EHR Analytics Track C. Diff Patients to Flag Infection Trends
“Labor costs represent over 50 percent of hospital operating budgets,” said Michael Swinford, President and CEO of GE Healthcare Services. “With this acquisition, GE Healthcare will be able to address a significant portion of hospital operations costs – assets, patients and labor – with a mix of software, real-time data, powerful analytics and professional services.”
The acquisition will add to GE’s portfolio of healthcare holdings, which includes everything from MRI machines and surgical equipment to clinical data archiving to its Centricity line of EHR products.  Additional areas of interest resulting from the API purchase include RFID tracking for medical devices, patient monitoring to help nurses be more efficient, and optimum staff scheduling to increase productivity.
“Fifty percent of the hospitals in this country still schedule their people manually,” added J.P. Fingado, API’s President and CEO. “By putting optimization technology in place, you can start to have a massive effect on the quality of care and the cost-savings at a hospital.”
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataClinical AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare Data Strategy


