IL Medicaid experiments with pop. health, clinical integration

January 16, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 16, 2014 - Illinois’ State Medicaid programs are experimenting with accountable care initiatives including more robust population health management and a focus on care coordination and clinical integration in order to cut costs and better serve its vulnerable and low income beneficiaries.  Under a federal waiver designed to foster healthcare delivery innovation, Illinois is tackling the problem of fractured, insufficient access to high quality care through a five-point plan intended to drive better patient outcomes through data-driven projects to foster provider communication and patient engagement.
The ambitious plan will attempt to overhaul much of the state’s healthcare delivery system and transform the region’s providers into an integrated, community-based health network encompassing everything from pre-natal care to food security for vulnerable seniors to long-term group housing.
The program’s goals include the creation of incentives to drive development of integrated care and patient-centered health homes, as well as enhancing the ability of providers to participate in health information exchange and leverage public resources that will improve population health management.
“Illinois is in the midst of a rapid and significant shift from a largely fee-for-service model to a variety of risk-based managed care models,” the state’s road map says.  “All of the entities will establish integrated delivery systems centered around Patient-Centered Health Homes. They will develop multi-disciplinary teams, robust care coordination capabilities, and a high level of integration among primary care, hospital and behavioral health providers. They will be linked by connective technology for tracking of clients and timely transmission of patient clinical data between provider partners. The providers within the network will agree to manage care transitions and deliver care in the most appropriate settings.”
Dig Deeper
Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
Predictive Analytics, Accountable Care Markets to See Rapid Growth
To aid providers in this quest, the state will create an Innovation and Transformation Resource Center (ITRC), which will act as the central hub for the transformation efforts.  ITRC will compile and share best practices, assist in establishing new payment methodologies and patient-centered workflows, and also provide technical assistance for IT projects like adopting telehealth, analytics, and other emerging technologies.
Other initiatives include a “carrot-and-stick” approach to improving quality measures such as depression and cancer screenings as well as the integration of mental health care with primary care to address patients that may otherwise fall through the gaps.
Frequent emergency room users and those with uncontrolled chronic health problems will be identified and targeted for intervention under a series of state projects.  Officials envision that telehealth will play an increasingly large roll in these efforts as partnerships with the region’s large academic medical centers and the state’s Department of Corrections expand.
While the draft of the road map does not include information on how much these transformational programs are anticipated to cost, the comprehensive plan is a huge step forward for accountable care and quality improvement.
“Illinois is among the last of the major states with an unsustainable fee-for-service Medicaid system,” the report concludes.  “Through the Path to Transformation waiver, Illinois seeks to become a national leader in Medicaid payment and delivery system innovation, transforming from a largely volume-driven, fee-for-service system to an advanced system of care where patient outcomes and provider payments are aligned.”
  Tagged Accountable CareAnalytics InfrastructureHealthcare Business IntelligenceHospital QualityQuality Of Care


