How Useful Are Wearable Devices for Patients, Providers?

November 18, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 18, 2014 - Patient-generated health data (PGHD) is an increasingly important piece of population health and chronic disease management, but wearable devices that track fitness, diet, and sleep data aren’t without their problems.  In addition to physician wariness and widespread privacy concerns about storing intimate personal data in the cloud, patients just aren’t sure what they’re going to get out of wearing their rubber wristbands around the clock.  The curiosity about digital data aggregators may be there, but what will drive patients towards embracing wearables?  A new survey by Manhattan Research shows an answer that’s as old as time: it’s all about what the data can do for them.
“We found that there is clearly awareness and an interest in the market about the whole phenomena of using data for health,” says Monique Levy, Vice President of Research for Manhattan Research, an offshoot of the Decision Resources Group.  “The issue is around really meaningful data.  The idea of being aware and tracking your basic vitals has been around for a while.  But consumers are more interested in this idea that it will help improve outcomes.”
The Cybercitizen Health Survey showed that active use of wearable devices is still in the single digits, but nearly a third are actively interested in using wearables to improve health.  The main driver of the interest was the notion that PGHD can help to lower personal healthcare costs.  Thirty percent of patients would feel motivated to track their daily vitals and other information if it could save them money.  Almost two-thirds said they would share their information if it actively improved their health or helped to treat their condition, Levy added.
“This is telling us that consumers are open to the idea of having more continuous feedback, as opposed to an intermittent care system.  They would like to have more continuous support for their care,” she said.
However, consumers remain extremely leery of the privacy and security implications of sending every little blip in their heart rate into the ether.  With a certain very high-profile data breach on the mind of every digital user, the consumer cloud is suddenly not quite as secure as it used to seem, even if healthcare experts believe that physical data breaches are actually a much easier, much more prevalent way for malicious crooks to gain access to healthcare information.
READ MORE: Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
“Attitudes toward privacy are a really tricky thing for us to explore,” Levy says.  “They tend to change based on what the data is.  Patients tend to be more tolerant if there are concrete things that they’ll get in return for sharing their data.  In general, patients want control over who accesses the data.  And they like the idea of being able to shut it off anytime.  They want to be sure that there’s a mechanism where they could rescind those rights if they wanted to, which is sort of interesting.”
“More than two-thirds of participants in the study either strongly agree or agree that they have privacy concerns,” Levy continued.  So I think it’s fundamental for everybody.  It’s a mainstream worry, but it doesn’t prevent people from pursuing it.  It’s just something that needs to be managed.”
In addition to patients worried about security, physicians are worried that wearables might not be all that useful to clinical practice.  While some patients may benefit from closer chronic disease management, the health IT developer community has not found a large-scale, reliable way to import patient-generated data into the EHR, perform meaningful analytics, and produce useful, concise reporting that doesn’t bog down the workflow.
“I hate to say it, but I think for this to really scale into a robust service or system, we’re going to have to dedicate real science to this,” Levy said.  “We’re going to have to understand what kind of data is relevant and how to interpret data flow.  How much data is enough?  And then we’re going to have to create systems around how the data will interface with the physician, and what can generate and an automated response.  What’s the margin of error and what are the algorithms that make sense to interpret this data?”
“Because it’s massive,” she added.  “And just having more data isn’t data decision making.  You need data scientists to understand what this means.  When you start to see this being more of a routine part of care, you’re going to need much more sophisticated processes and systems.”
READ MORE: How Healthcare Can Prep for Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning
While data scientists are a scarce resource for healthcare organizations, some of the biggest names in the technology world are pouring time and resources into the bet that wearable fitness devices aren’t just a fad.  Apple, Google, and Samsung are all bidding for consumer attention in the mHealth sphere, and a half dozen more entrants into the field seem to emerge each month.  EHR developers like Epic, Cerner, and athenahealth are among the first vendors trying to build those sophisticated processes that will allow healthcare providers to truly harness the potential of wearables.
“Management of patient data is a core expertise that’s flourishing in many domains,” said Levy. “It will be more of a pervasive science, but I think the discipline around creating rules for how this happens is quite complex.  You’re going to have to have many different stakeholders involved in the process.”
While having some big names on board bodes well for the wearables industry, “I think this is just classic early market interest,” she said.  “The Apple iWatch and HealthKit are a wonderful sign of the times and where our thinking is going.  But that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s ready to roll out that quickly.  Some physicians might be early adopters for highly sophisticated patients, but that’s not the norm.  If we’re going to talk about scale again you need to have the business case to make this reliable, and that’s going to be a lot of hard work.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsmHealthPatient Data


