Gaps in public health work, data reporting raise outbreak risks

December 18, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 18, 2013 - Incomplete data reporting and a lack of funding for population health initiatives significantly increase the risk of widespread disease outbreaks, says a new report by Trust for America’s Health (TFAH) and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. One third of states lack sufficient safeguards against contagions ranging from the seasonal flu to salmonella to antibiotic-resistant superbugs responsible for many hospital acquired infections (HAIs). The “unacceptable level of unnecessary risk” exposes Americans to costly and dangerous illnesses that contribute to the financial and manpower strain on the healthcare system.
“Infectious diseases disrupt lives and communities,” said Jeffrey Levi, PhD, executive director of TFAH. “Fighting these diseases requires constant vigilance. The bad news is that we found major gaps in the country’s ability to prevent, control and treat outbreaks.” Only three states, Georgia, Nebraska, and New Jersey, achieved the highest ranking on the risk indication score developed by TFAH, with New Hampshire coming dead last with an 8 out of 10 risk of widespread infection and few resources to combat it.
Despite the fact that one in twenty hospitalized patients will acquire an infection while inside the facility, one third of states do not require public data reporting of HAIs. Two-thirds of states decreased their levels of funding for public health initiatives between 2011 and 2013, while half of public health laboratories failed to test their continuity of operations plans through a drill or an actual event in the past year.
Additional systematic weaknesses include a widespread lack of appropriate vaccinations against diseases like seasonal flu and HPV. Only Connecticut, Delaware, and Washington, D.C. meet the HHS goal of vaccinating 90% of toddlers against whooping cough, and routine HIV/AIDS screenings are only covered under Medicaid in two-thirds of states.
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
Three Finalists Named for $100,000 Population Health Prize
“Many infectious disease threats keep me up at night – from the emergence of a new deadly disease, such as the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), to the prospect of bioterrorism, to antibiotic resistant infections, to the worsening of mosquito-borne illnesses being driven by changes in the climate,” said Tom Inglesby, MD, chief executive officer and director of the UPMC Center for Health Security.
TFAH’s suggestions for improving the nation’s public health infrastructure include modernizing public health reporting, surveillance, and response protocols, equipping laboratories with the necessary staff and resources to combat serious disease outbreaks, and providing better public education and awareness about diseases like HIV/AIDS, hepatitis, and tuberculosis.
A full list of state rankings and preparedness statistics is available here.
Tagged Clinical IntelligencePatient CarePopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


