Big Data Governance Crucial for Healthcare’s Internet of Things

January 28, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 28, 2015 - It’s been six years since the number of internet-connected electronic devices surpassed the number of people who own them, the FTC says in a new report, but the Internet of Things is just getting started.  Big data is getting bigger, consumers are getting more eager, and healthcare is in store for a massive privacy and security headache if the industry doesn’t implement strong data governance guidelines – and stick to them.
Summarizing a 2013 workshop that questioned how consumer devices should be managed and secured, the report outlines several of the Federal Trade Commission’s suggestions for ensuring that the Internet of Things (IoT) can work for consumers in a healthcare context without betraying their trust.
From wearable fitness trackers to omniscient pill bottles to smart scales that beam measurements directly into a provider’s EHR, healthcare is a prime proving ground for the Internet of Thing’s promises and pitfalls.  Health information is second only to financial data, perhaps, as the most sensitive part of a patient’s life, and requires significant protections against data breaches caused by human error, hackers, or even just the insatiable curiosity of nosy staff.
The FTC report can give healthcare providers a head start on developing a big data governance program that can appropriately handle the challenges of an increasingly interconnected, internet-enabled life.
Build security into everything
READ MORE: Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
It’s easy to say that security should be the top priority for any new build, but different devices require different levels of protections.  The FTC recommends that providers start by conducting an internal risk assessment related to how patient data will be collected, stored, and moved.  Staff members should be regularly educated on the importance of privacy guidelines, and should be reminded that holding and using patient data is a significant responsibility.  Organizations may also wish to hire outside help when developing security protocols, and build several different lines of defense into their infrastructure should a breach occur.  Lastly, organizations should conduct periodic reviews of security measures and patch vulnerabilities where applicable.
Only collect what data you need
The usefulness of patent-generated health data already has providers divided.  While some are happy enough to accept fitness reports or home blood pressure readings, others feel overwhelmed by the sheer volume of data that is poorly integrated into EHRs not designed for the task.  “Only collect what you need” will therefore mean something unique to every organization, but the bottom line is that the more data you have, the more likely something will go wrong with it.
“Data minimization can help guard against two privacy-related risks,” the report explains. “First, larger data stores present a more attractive target for data thieves, both outside and inside a company – and increases the potential harm to consumers from such an event. Second, if a company collects and retains large amounts of data, there is an increased risk that the data will be used in a way that departs from consumers’ reasonable expectations.”
Healthcare providers interested in collecting patient-generated data from IoT devices should form a clear idea of what information is necessary to achieve population health management or personalized care goals.
READ MORE: How the Search for Smart Data Drives Healthcare IT Investment
“They can decide not to collect data at all; collect only the fields of data necessary to the product or service being offered; collect data that is less sensitive; or deidentify the data they collect,” says the report. “If a company determines that none of these options will fulfill its business goals, it can seek consumers’ consent for collecting additional, unexpected categories of data.”
Ensure consumer consent for collection and use
At some point, every consumer has rolled his eyes at the terms and conditions presented after downloading an app or installing a piece of software, only to be surprised later on that the program had access to his call logs or spammed his friends with unauthorized email invites.  Games and personality quizzes might present a fairly low-risk example of how consent is key for consumers, but healthcare organizations cannot afford to be in violation of HIPAA – let alone of common sense – when sharing access to lab results, clinical notes, or claims data.
While the FTC notes that littering every legitimate data collection process with “I accept” checkboxes may frustrate consumers instead of help them, “for uses that would be inconsistent with the context of the interaction (i.e., unexpected), companies should offer clear and conspicuous choices.”
For healthcare, this may mean notifying patients when their deidentified data is going to be used for academic research purposes, sent through an opt-in health information exchange, or used to generate personalized notifications and reminders about routine care sent to their smartphones. 
READ MORE: VA, CMS Announce Data Sharing, Fraud Prevention Partnership
Understand and adhere to legislation
“When in doubt, ask HIPAA” may be a good motto for healthcare’s dive into the Internet of Things, but other legislation may crop up as internet-enabled devices move deeper and deeper into the everyday experience.  The FTC has recommended that Congress enact stricter data privacy rules to preempt possible threats, especially where physical harm may result.
“General data security legislation should protect against unauthorized access to both personal information and device functionality itself,” the report states. “For example, if a pacemaker is not properly secured, the concern is not merely that health information could be compromised, but also that a person wearing it could be seriously harmed.”
“Such legislation should be flexible and technology-neutral, while also providing clear rules of the road for companies about such issues as how to provide choices to consumers about data collection and use practices.”
The FTC is limited in its ability to establish comprehensive privacy rules that will ensure the safety and security of the Internet of Things, but it can strongly urge developers and data-holders to pay close attention to how data is governed.  As the nation waits for Congress to delve into the issue, “we will continue to use our existing tools to ensure that IoT companies continue to consider security and privacy issues as they develop new devices.”
  Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsHealthcare Internet of ThingsPatient Data


