Using Health IT to Support the Patient-Centered Medical Home

March 05, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 05, 2015 - The patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model is such a successful initiative because it puts the patient-provider relationship at the core of a data-driven, coordinated care continuum.  Providers interested in achieving PCMH recognition must rely on a multi-faceted health IT infrastructure complete with robust population health management capabilities, health information exchange, and open communication between patients and staff.
Assuming the healthcare organization has already taken the step of implementing basic EHR technology, the PCMH model requires providers to leverage health IT in several key areas that support patient-centric care.  A healthcare organization striving for the upper levels of PCMH recognition must be able to use patient registries, risk stratification tools, health information exchange, and clinical analytics to provide services, assess their progress, and continually improve care quality.
After exploring the basics of the patient-centered medical home in the first article of HealthITAnalytics’ practice transformation series, we move deeper into the six “must-pass” requirements for PCMH recognition within the popular NCQA framework, and break down the health IT infrastructure requirements necessary to achieve each of these important benchmarks.
Sufficient access to care during regular office hours
While it may seem obvious that patients should be able to get quick appointments with their primary care providers, many healthcare organizations suffer from long wait times, the need to shuffle patients to alternate providers and a lack of communication options outside of the traditional office visit.
READ MORE: Machine Learning Can Flag Adverse Drug Events in Unstructured Data
For the first must-pass care access measure, organizations must overcome these obstacles and provide, at the very least, same-day appointments for their established patients.  In addition to same-day appointment setting, they must also be able to do at least one of the following: use secure electronic messaging to deliver timely clinical advice, provide clinical help over the telephone, and/or document any clinical advice in the medical record.
Electronic tools are not required to meet any of these criteria, but there is patient management software that can turn a clogged appointment calendar into a more seamless experience.  Integrated patient tracking features are among the most requested from providers looking to invest in EHRs, and can help manage revenue cycle issues, as well.
The implementation of a patient portal can help providers check off several items from the list, including some criteria from other must-have objectives.  Patient portals often include secure messaging features, among the most sought-after patient engagement tools, and the inbox can be staffed by a rotating team of nurses or physician assistants.  Utilizing a patient portal as a hub for communication outside of a traditional appointment also makes it easier for providers to document these communications somewhere in the patient’s individual record.
Using data for population health management
Population health management is at the core of the patient-centered medical home, and these key competencies are some of the most important for effectively providing both preventative care and chronic disease management services.  PCMH hopefuls must use patient information, clinical data, and evidence-based guidelines to create patient lists and provide service reminders for at least two of the following four criteria in this element:
READ MORE: HIMSS18 Is All About Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare
• At least three different preventative care options, including well-child visits, annual physicals, mammograms, immunizations, or blood sugar testing
• At least three different chronic disease management or chronic care services for issues such as diabetes, asthma, coronary artery disease, depression, obesity, or post-hospitalization follow-up
• Patients taking specific medications such as those with notable potential for harmful side effects, patients who may be better served by a generic drug instead of a more expensive name brand product, or patients who may be affected by a drug recall
• Patients who have not been seen recently by a provider within the practice or are overdue for routine care, follow-ups, or screenings
Providers can meet these measures by implementing population health management software that integrates with the EHR, developing patient registries that automatically pull clinical data to flag, sort, and notify members based on certain selected criteria.  Patient portals can also be applied to this measure by helping to disseminate electronic reminders and making it easier for patients to schedule appointments online for missed or canceled services.
READ MORE: CMS Public Health Data Repository Will Aid Quality Reporting
When selecting a population health management software vendor to complement patient-centered medical home initiatives, providers should look for products that work well with existing EHR infrastructure, foster interoperability, provide actionable insights at the point-of-care, integrate into the provider workflow to allow for meaningful patient-provider conversation.
Individual patient care management
The patient care management measure requires providers to meet three to four collaborative communication items, including conducting pre-visit preparations, discussing individual treatment goals, barriers, and care management support structures with the patient and family, and providing the patient with a written plan of care and/or clinical summary at the end of each visit.  At least 75 percent of patients must receive these care measures in order to meet the PCMH guideline.
While providers can certainly meet this requirement without the use of an EHR, most electronic health records are now equipped with the ability to document care plans and automatically generate a clinical summary to be printed or electronically distributed at the conclusion of a consult.  Providers must be careful, however, to include necessary elements for care coordination when developing templates and inputting information into their EHRs to ensure they are including the necessary elements.
Support the self-care process
The patient-centered medical home is intended to provide comprehensive support to patients battling with chronic diseases as well as those who are healthy and wish to stay that way.  Supporting the self-care process when a patient is outside of the provider’s direct purview is a critical aspect of the PCMH model, and relies on a commitment from a dedicated care team.  To meet this criteria, providers must prove they can do at least three of the following:
• Provide or refer at least half of patients to tailored education resources
• Use an EHR to identify patient-specific resources for more than ten percent of the population
• Create and document self-management goals for at least half of patients and their families
• Document the self-care abilities of vulnerable patients at least half of the time
• Provide tools and instruct patients and their families to document their own care actions at home for 50 percent of patients
• Counsel at least half of patients about the adoption of healthy lifestyle choices and positive behaviors
Providers may tap into the growing interest in wearable mHealth devices and home monitoring tools to help with these patient engagement tasks, automating the patient-generated health data collection process and even allowing this data to be sent electronically directly into the EHR.  Providers may also refer their patients to online resources  or mHealth apps that coach and council those with specific chronic diseases or help caregivers follow home treatment plans.
To meet this measure, providers should consider the health literacy and computer literacy of their patients, and should also assess any language barriers that may necessitate materials in the patient’s most comfortable tongue.  Providers should also be aware that the NCQA requires proof that written care plans have been provided to patients, so keeping electronic copies of this information in the patient’s EHR file may be appropriate.
Referral tracking and patient follow-up
Primary care providers who lack advanced health information exchange capabilities continue to struggle to communicate with specialists and provide truly coordinated patient care.  While the patient-centered medical home is intended to create an ecosystem of connected providers with the patient herself at the core, the reality is that the healthcare industry remains siloed, fragmented, isolated, and unable to share information.
For the fifth PCMH must-pass element, providers need to enlist the help of health information exchange technology in a manner that closely follows the requirements of meaningful use.  Providers must be able to send pertinent clinical information to specialists, obtain a report of the consultation, and demonstrate the ability to exchange problem and medication lists, allergies, and test results, and communicate with patients who may be able to self-refer to other providers.
While Direct messaging and other simple electronic protocols can start providers off on a path towards meaningful HIE, joining a local, regional, or statewide health information exchange will streamline the process and may even provide additional clinical analytics and population health management capabilities at the same time.
However, providers should be careful to ensure that their frequent business partners and most popular specialists are also participating in the health information exchange infrastructure they choose in order to ensure interoperable communication for their specific patient population.
Implement continuous quality improvement
Becoming a patient-centered medical home isn’t just about achieving all the right marks on a set of check-boxes.  It’s about continually pushing a primary care practice to meet higher and higher standards of patient satisfaction, care quality, and patient outcomes – and all the health IT in the world cannot replace a positive, committed attitude.  This pledge to enact ongoing quality improvements and continually self-assess shortfalls is so important that the NCQA considers it the last of the must-have criteria.
Providers must set goals and take action to improve care access and consistently enrich population health management capabilities in order to achieve and maintain PCMH recognition.  They may also choose to identify and ameliorate at least one disparity in care identified in a vulnerable population or include patient feedback in the practice’s quality improvement and transformational efforts.
While providers may choose to leverage analytics and a sophisticated dashboard to develop clinical quality measures that assess provider performance and patient outcomes, a simple patient survey, printed or electronic, could also reveal a surprising opportunity for improvement that may have slipped through the cracks.  Understanding what patients expect and require from their providers, identifying chances to provide better services, and addressing those issues proactively is what makes the patient-centered medical home such a success, and is a vitally important component of any healthcare provider’s overall practice transformation strategy.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructurePatient Centered Medical HomePopulation Health ManagementPractice Transformation Series


