Trainee informaticists must face myriad EHRs, analytics tools

January 21, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 21, 2014 - Providers forced to switch from one health IT suite to another after a failed implementation or a necessary upgrade always have plenty to grumble about.  New interfaces, new workflows, and new reporting protocols can throw any employee off track for a while.  But what about students who are training to be the clinical informaticists, quality improvement officers, and data scientists of the future?  They don’t know what system they’ll end up working with after graduation, so they have to be proficient in a variety of tools and have the critical thinking skills to adapt to unfamiliar or unwieldy technology.
At American Sentinel University, Provost and professor Kurt Linberg, PhD, is leading a new generation of health information systems managers through this thorny puzzle. The demand for competent informatics professionals is expanding daily, and the number of academic programs designed to address this burgeoning job opportunity is also growing at a rapid pace.  Linberg sat down with HealthITAnalytics to discuss some of the challenges of equipping students with the necessary abilities to bring data analytics into more healthcare organizations.
What are some of the problems facing the industry right now as analytics becomes more attractive to providers?
We’re realizing that, in working with our different healthcare partners, it’s more than just a nursing shortage.  They’re dealing with these very tough system integration issues.
They need more technologists.  They need more information system managers and more executives with an understanding of healthcare challenges.  So we’ve refocused many of our programs to help fill that gap in the Masters of Science, and HIS management is one of these programs that we’ve enhanced to help the graduates solve some of these pretty nasty integration challenges.
READ MORE: Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
What we’re seeing is the people that are working in healthcare institutions right now are just so busy trying to migrate their systems and integrate different EHR enhancements that they don’t have a lot of time to go to school.  So we’re looking at other professionals that might be working in finance, for instance, who want to move in to help solve some of these healthcare system issues.  That’s really our focus.  We’re helping bring in professionals that have the credibility to roll up their sleeves and start integrating some of these EHR systems or Meaningful Use dashboards, or any other kind of clinical systems.
How successful has the Masters of Science in Information Systems Management program been so far?
We are basically just starting out.  We’ve got maybe 20 students so far.  So we’re fairly small, but when we talk with our industry advisors, they’re like, “This is a homerun.  How fast can you get it done?”  And, again, it’s small because our previous focus has been so much on nursing.  Now we’re realizing that to be true partners with these healthcare providers, we have to supply the technologists and the managers of that technology and healthcare informaticists, so we’re thinking that these programs are going to grow pretty fast.
What were some of your concerns when designing the program?
Students aren’t going to really learn these concepts unless they’re practicing.  They need to be hands-on with some type of analytical tool, for instance, or doing some database queries.  And then, we also make sure that every one of our programs at American Sentinel includes an ethics piece, because it’s not just about doing the job as a professional, but it’s also realizing that in many of these areas there are some ethical dilemmas.   As students, they need to be aware that there has to be some more thoughtful decision making around how to use data.  Is it compliant to HIPAA and other requirements?  They have to be exposed to a number of different areas so that they will be successful when they’re graduating.
READ MORE: AMA Launches Integrated Healthcare Big Data Analytics Platform
What technology do you use to help train your students?
To be honest, we’re struggling a little bit with that.  We thought we could standardize on one EHR system, but we’re finding that there are so many different products out there that we’re likely going to be just identifying a number of different tools and having students practice with a sample database, but also learn the differences between a Epic system and a Cerner system, for example.  Because we don’t know in three, four years where’s this world is going to be.  And we hate to focus all our attention on one tool and not pick the right one.
What we’re trying to do is have the students realize the current challenges.  Regardless of what type of systems are going to be used, they’ll have the basic framework to know how to manage these systems from start to finish.  And from my background, the challenges are usually around the data.  Many times, the data isn’t defined consistently or they’re trying to integrate systems that really have different architecture.  So we’re basically just having the students prepared for the full spectrum of challenges that they may face in the future.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical InformaticsClinical IntelligenceEHR Analytics


