ICD-10, Population Health Management Atop Hospital Budgets

March 03, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 03, 2015 - Hospitals and health systems are snapping up technology tools to help them manage the ICD-10 transition, according to a report from market research company peer60, but the largest healthcare organizations have moved beyond the basics of ICD-10 preparation and are focusing instead on population health management and patient engagement as their top priorities in 2015.
With core EHR systems largely in place and additional regulatory challenges on the horizon, hospitals are eager to implement data management tools that will position them for success in the difficult months to come.
Nearly 1000 hospital executive leaders and decision makers participated in the poll, which found that over half of organizations are planning to make some major investments in ICD-10 migration tools. ICD-10 technology vendors are competing in a highly fragmented market with few clear leaders in either market share or mindshare, though the biggest hospital systems are largely invested with familiar health IT leaders such as 3M, Epic Systems, and McKesson. While the 2014 delay is still haunting many ICD-10 transitional programs, 85 percent of organizations that have already chosen an ICD-10 partner are planning to stick with them and pursue compliance with no further vendor changes.
The market for population health management infrastructure is similarly divided between a few recognizable names and a large number of competitors seeking a foothold in a rapidly expanding area of opportunity. More than half of hospitals under 100 beds have not invested in any population health management technology yet, but that number shrinks to just 25 percent for hospitals with more than 1000 beds. Overall, 35 percent of hospitals have not yet chosen a population health management technology partner. As hospital size goes up, the market consolidates around a few key vendors, including Cerner, Allscripts, Optum, and the Advisory Board.
Dig Deeper
Artificial Intelligence Helps with Costs, Clinical Care at HIMSS18
Population Health is Top Data Analytics Challenge for Providers, Payers
Business Intelligence Tools Bring Insights to Organ Donation Network
Interest in population health infrastructure is being driven by the C-suite, with more than 80 percent of Chief Medical Information Officers and 68 percent of Chief Information Officers leading the charge towards technologies that will drive participation in care coordination, chronic disease management, and patient-centered care in order to set up organizations for greater investment in risk-based accountable care arrangements.
To complement these population health programs, organizations are also investing in patient engagement solutions such as patient portals. Surprisingly, while 40 percent of hospitals do not yet have a patient engagement suite in place, the biggest market is for replacement technologies. Sixty-two percent of hospitals making investments in patient engagement are leaving their current vendors and seeking new partners, which they may find with market share leaders including MEDITECH, Epic, Allscripts, Cerner, and CPSI.
Further down on the priority list, yet still critical to a hospital’s overall data management strategy, is technology that allows for clinical analytics to support these other population health and care quality initiatives. While Epic Systems and McKesson have both secured top spots in the minds and wallets of the pure data analytics market, the segment adds a number of new names to the mix.
Infrastructure experts such as IBM, SAP, and Oracle are popular among mid-size and larger hospitals, while smaller organizations are investing in clinical analytics products that may be add-ons to existing suites from vendors known for their EHR products. Sixty percent of the smallest hospitals have made no investment in healthcare analytics. That number drops to a mere seven percent of the largest hospital systems.
The healthcare industry has a number of tough challenges ahead of it that will require continued investment in health IT tools to foster population health management, clinical analytics, patient engagement, and more. The intense focus on purchasing products that further these goals may be a positive step for providers who are increasingly aware that relying on basic technologies simply won’t cut it any longer.
With ICD-10 on the horizon and a surge towards value-based purchasing making data-driven revenue and patient management a key component of the healthcare analytics landscape, hospitals that make wise investments in 2015 may see an easier path towards healthcare reform in the long term.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


