Patient Engagement a Low Priority for Healthcare Organizations

February 11, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 11, 2015 - Despite being touted as a major part of the healthcare reform puzzle, patient engagement is not high on the priority lists of provider organizations, claims a new report by Chillmark Research.  With many organizations relying on basic patient portals and some providers not even getting that far, the industry has a long way to go before patients can be properly engaged in their own decision making and their own care.
Part of the problem is that the vendor community has not yet produced simple, cost-effective technologies that can grab a patient’s attention while integrating smoothly into a healthcare provider’s already-strained workflow.  The report found a lack of products that can leverage patient interest in mHealth, including mobile access and personal planning applications that allow patients to complete necessary task.
“The majority of today’s market is operating at a kind of standoff: provider organizations are relying on their existing vendors to lead the way on new engagement tools, while those companies have been reactive, not proactive, with their customers’ engagement needs,” explains report author Naveen Rao. “The more innovative products – the mobile apps, cloud-based care plans, remote-monitoring plays – are coming from outside traditional legacy vendors’ purview. While some of the bigger vendors are showing signs of updating their products, we expect to see most legacy vendors follow a buy rather than build strategy to address market needs more rapidly.”
As population health management continues to gain ground as a key competency for healthcare organizations, strategies and products that allow patients to manage their chronic diseases, easily complete administrative tasks, and view, share, and download their personal health information will become essential for the health IT infrastructure of all providers.  Yet many patient portals continue to offer relatively flat and uninspired experiences – and physicians rarely promote the service to their patients.
Dig Deeper
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Are Clinical Trials Diverse Enough to Ensure Patient Safety?
Developing Community Partners for Population Health Management
Through patient engagement is a top priority for healthcare consumers themselves, a third of patients have never even been offered the option to access a patient portal by their physician, a recent Xerox survey found.   Viewing online capabilities as a primary reason for choosing a physician for these patients, yet a separate poll by TechnologyAdvice noted that 37.4 patients had never been offered follow-up messaging, educational material, online test results or diagnosis information, secure messaging, or online appointment scheduling and bill pay services.
“Primary care physicians are reporting some of the highest rates of EHR adoption to comply with government regulations and to receive incentives from Meaningful Use, but a significantly lower number of patients claim to have access to these patient portal services,” TechnologyAdvice Managing Editor Cameron Graham, author of the study.
Even though a patient portal is required to meet Stage 2 of the EHR Incentive Programs, healthcare organizations may be focusing on other regulatory and reform initiatives instead of building robust, truly interactive portals, the Chillmark report suggests.  Providers working to build integrated clinical networks, bolster their healthcare analytics capabilities, or move towards risk-based accountable care models could be leaving patient engagement for the future, regardless of the important role patients play in each of these other initiatives.
Tagged Care CoordinationPatient DataPatient Engagement


