AAFP Asks ONC for Simplified Path to Health IT Interoperability

January 22, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 22, 2015 - Industry-wide health IT interoperability is a top priority for the Office of the National Coordinator, but the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) would like to see a smoother, easier path towards achieving the goals of the ONC’s data sharing and usage roadmap.  In a letter to National Coordinator Karen DeSalvo last week, the AAFP points out that the “myriad of regulations and rules from multiple agencies” involved in care quality improvement, health information exchange, and  data governance “places a heavy administrative burden” on physicians with few resources and little time to spare.
In December, the ONC updated its Federal Health IT Strategic Plan to include a sharper focus on promoting the value and use of data in clinical decision making.  With the growing adoption of EHR technology, data analytics, and health information exchange, as well as a greater reliance on population health management and the principles of accountable care, the 2011 document was in need of a facelift.
“The AAFP appreciates that ONC and other agencies have worked hard to create a strategic plan for the future of health information technology (HIT) within the United States,” writes Reid B. Blackwelder, MD, FAAFP, the Academy’s Board Chair.  “We strongly support the vision and mission stated in the report. Readily accessible health information is critical for us to improve the efficiency and sustainability of health care.”
“The AAFP appreciates the linkage and progression from collection, to sharing, and then to using of health information. We agree with using these stages to organize the activities for the strategic plan. This strategic plan provides a blueprint to move forward and we must now define and implement its tactics.”
Dig Deeper
How Healthcare Big Data Analytics Helps Build Smart Societies
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
CT Medical Society Announces New Health Information Exchange
However, during the ONC’s and CMS’s efforts to achieve their strategic targets, a number of different reporting programs and quality metrics have come and gone, leaving physicians with overlapping participation periods, a half-dozen different penalties for non-participation or non-compliance, and a disjointed sense of their responsibilities for working towards collaborative goals.  CMS has targeted administrative simplification and the alignment of reporting programs as one of its primary objectives, which could help providers to make better sense when developing their own roadmaps and plans.
“As efforts across agencies can be harmonized and where possible combined, it could significantly decrease this burden on practices,” Blackwelder says. “We are supportive of the principles laid out in the strategic plan and urge a continued focus on value. Simplification of regulations and elimination of waste would demonstrate such a focus.”
The plan would also benefit from a greater acknowledgement of just how far the industry has come with adopting health information exchange, Direct messaging, and building a robust data analytics infrastructure, the letter adds.  As the industry gets more comfortable with the notion of health data as a strategic asset that must be smoothly and securely leveraged and shared, the ONC’s goals should reflect the progress made over the past decade.
“As the AAFP considers its strategic plan for the next ten years for health IT, we believe that interoperability remains a key capability for our specialty. Usability of health IT is also top of mind for our members. Work is required to develop complete sociotechnical systems that support primary care’s key capabilities needed to achieve the three-part aim.”
“Focus is needed to ensure concerted efforts that result in significant movement toward achievement of the three-part aim,” Blackwelder concludes. “We believe that focusing on key capabilities that health care organizations and providers really need could assure the concerted efforts. We propose that population health management, care coordination, and patient engagement be the key capabilities focused on for the near term.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealth Information ExchangeHealthcare Data Strategy


