Most Patients Eager to Join Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort

August 19, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 19, 2016 - The Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) Cohort may have a brighter-than-anticipated future ahead of it, according to a new survey of potential participants conducted by the National Institutes of Health. 
Nearly 80 percent of the 2601 patients responding to the poll supported the idea of a million-patient biobank, and 54 percent added that they were very likely to contribute their genetic, clinical, and environmental data if asked.
However, patients aren’t being purely altruistic, the researchers found.  While most agreed that the study should take place no matter who was selected to contribute, the strongest motivation for potentially participating in the PMI Cohort was the possibility of learning more about their own health, including their risks for developing serious diseases.
“We are excited about engaging participants in this historic research effort,” said Kathy L. Hudson, PhD, NIH Deputy Director for Science, Outreach and Policy and a study author. “These survey results are extremely promising — they show that after people learn about the PMI Cohort Program, they’re supportive, and they recognize the value in taking part.”
One of the most significant outcomes of the poll was evidence that patients from all demographic groups showed similar levels of interest in participating.
READ MORE: VA Precision Medicine Databank Hits 500,000 Participants
The PMI Cohort project, as well as any other big data biobanking effort, relies on a broad, realistic sample of data across racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic lines in order to represent the wide variation in genetic makeup and environmental influence present in the American population.
“These survey results suggest that people from all walks of life will be interested in the cohort program,” said Dave Kaufman, PhD, lead author and a program director at NIH’s National Human Genome Research Institute.
The survey did find that participants with higher levels of education, an urban address, or higher household income were slightly more supportive of the Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort, which may present some challenges for recruiting participants outside of these groups.  
“It may take some more thought and effort to engage older people and those with fewer years of education,” Kaufman acknowledged. “These results were helpful in identifying areas where the PMI Cohort Program may want to focus outreach efforts, beyond the communities that have been historically underrepresented in research.”
Seventy-seven percent of respondents who supported the idea of the study but did not wish to participate said that engaging with researchers would take too much of their time.  Conversely, among those who affirmed they were interested in participating, 42 percent would commit at least ten years to the project. 
READ MORE: All of Us Precision Medicine Network Expands with $13.8M in Grants
When asked to imagine that they had agreed to join the study, whether they expressed true willingness or not, nearly three-quarters of respondents said they would be comfortable submitting samples of blood, urine, hair, or saliva.  Seventy-five percent would contribute patient-generated health data (PGHD) from an activity tracker.
Even higher percentages were interested in sharing other types of data.  Seventy-six percent would contribute genetic information, and 77 percent would make their family medical histories available.  Eighty-three percent would collect soil and water samples from their home environment, while 84 percent would detail their lifestyle, diet, and exercise routines for research purposes.
Respondents did expect some form of reward for their time and effort, however.  Most were interested in learning more about their personal health (90 percent), while 80 percent would appreciate some monetary compensation.  Seventy-seven percent were interested in receiving healthcare services based on individual results.
Only a bare majority prioritized the potential receipt of free internet connections (56 percent), activity trackers (55 percent) or smartphones with data plans (52 percent) in return for their personal health data.  These respondents were more likely to be younger, less educated, or have lower levels of income.
Perhaps even more encouragingly, potential participants wanted to be truly involved in the outcomes of the healthcare industry’s precision medicine work. 
READ MORE: NIH Grants UCSF $11.7M for Pediatric Precision Medicine Equity
Most patients wanted to receive health-related results from the study, should it go forward.  Lab results and genetic data were highest on the wish-list, while others wanted information on their genetic and family health histories. 
Sixty percent would like to receive information about other research studies that may be related to their unique health status – a positive result for precision medicine researchers looking to fill a slew of very selective clinical trials.
Respondents also wanted to have decision-making power, the study showed.  Seventy-six percent said that participants and researchers should be “equal partners” in the precision medicine study, while up to two-thirds of respondents said that participants should be involved throughout the execution of the project.
Participants wanted input about what kinds of research were appropriate, what to do with study results, and what research questions to answer.  Fewer were eager to help collect study data or recruit additional participants, while less than 20 percent wanted to help design the study or analyze the data.
Concerns over data privacy and a desire to control the use and dissemination of personal information were primary motivators for patients who said they wanted to be actively involved in guiding the study. 
“When asked about allowing different categories of researchers to use their samples and information, people were most likely to say they would share with researchers at the NIH (79 percent) and US academic researchers (71 percent),” the study explained. “There was more reluctance to share with pharmaceutical or drug company researchers (52 percent) or other government researchers (44 percent).”
Only 43 percent of people would be comfortable with making their data freely available to anyone if it was thoroughly deidentified first.
Overall, the survey provides a promising foundation for forthcoming the Precision Medicine Initiative Cohort.  The Mayo Clinic will be taking a leadership role in the development of the biobank over the next five years, relying on $142 million in grant funding to support the massive undertaking.
At the moment, the biggest genetic data repository in the United States is the Department of Veteran Affairs’ Million Veteran Program, which recently enrolled its 500,000th participant.  But if the findings from the NIH’s new survey are generalizable to the larger population, the PMI Cohort may have little trouble surpassing that mark.
The NIH and its precision medicine partners will need to take the results into account as they create their recruitment strategies, added Kaufman, and offer potential enrollees the chance to share their opinions and control their own data in return for their long-term participation.
“To sustain participants’ commitment over the long term, researchers must continue working as part of the study communities,” he said. “Participants offer terrific ideas and insights when researchers earn their trust.”
How Precision Medicine Will Shift from Research to Clinical Care
Top 5 Basics to Know about the Precision Medicine Initiative
Tagged Medical ResearchPersonalized MedicinePrecision MedicinePrecision Medicine Initiative


