Meaningful Use, ICD-10 Drive Healthcare Big Data Analytics

October 16, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 16, 2015 - Just under half of US hospitals have deployed some type of healthcare big data analytics infrastructure focused on generating actionable business intelligence insights, says a new survey by HIMSS Analytics and Qlik, driven mostly by the pressure of big-ticket mandates such as meaningful use and ICD-10. 
The international survey found that that US lags behind its overseas counterparts, with just 47 percent of American organizations embracing business intelligence software compared to 57 percent of facilities worldwide. 
But providers are quickly looking to make up lost ground.  An additional 23 percent of US providers reported concrete plans to implement big data analytics capabilities in the near future, with the majority of those organizations eyeing the next seven to twelve months for go-live.
“Utilizing a modern and contemporary BI and analytics platform provides real-time data that is simple for self-service use, as it removes the guess work by the end-user and increases adoption,” said John Hoyt, executive vice president HIMSS Analytics in a press release.  More than half of organizations have deployed their business intelligence and analytics systems across the entire enterprise, the survey found.
Dig Deeper
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Understanding the Many V’s of Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Data Mining, Big Data Analytics in Healthcare: What’s the Difference?
Respondents reported that they have achieved high levels of maturity with analytics infrastructure that supports meaningful use, responding to financial pressures that have dictated the major course of health IT adoption over the past six years. 
Other high-priority areas include tools that target average length of stay, clinical benchmarking, supply chain management, emergency department utilization rates, and preventable readmissions.
Population health management and accountable care fell near the bottom of the maturity scale, with just ten percent of providers rating these analytics systems as “advanced.”  Most participants confessed to possessing only middling competency with these initiatives, but approximately 90 percent of providers did have some sort of analytics technology to address these emerging concerns.
Half of providers have seen faster and more accurate decision-making and measurable cost savings from their big data analytics and business intelligence programs.  Participants also noted an increase in internal transparency, greater operational and clinical efficiencies, easier integration of disparate data sources, and a reduction in ad hoc reporting requests.
However, less than five percent of providers reported meaningful workflow efficiencies, or reductions in patient length of stay.  Only 4 percent of providers said they had improved their chronic disease management capabilities.  One percent of respondents reported a reduction in preventable readmissions; zero said they had been able to increase revenue collection at the point of care.
Hospitals faced a number of human-centered problems when attempting to boost adoption and uptake of big data analytics solutions.  When asked about top challenges to realizing the full potential of their technologies, providers most frequently cited “end-user adoption” as their main roadblock.
“With 42 percent of those surveyed reporting that a hiccup in leveraging BI and analytics platforms is end-user adoption, it is imperative that healthcare organizations implement a system that is user-centric and has the ability to provide quick access, analysis and dissemination of information,” Hoyt said. “This enables healthcare organization executives to make operational improvements, improving overall patient care and efficiency.”
Other obstacles included insufficient dashboard and reporting capabilities, data aggregation and data quality issues, poor clinical and business workflow integration, slow response times, and cultural resistance to the adoption of new processes and tools.
Providers also reported the ICD-10 transition as a notable struggle, but they aren’t getting the new code set get them down for long.  The majority of participants pinned ICD-10 as one of their top investment priorities within the next two years as the wealth of new data generated by the detailed code set offers providers new opportunities for risk stratification and patient management. 
Population health management, revenue cycle management, predictive analytics, and better integration with existing solutions will also be attracting dollars and attention over the short term.  Respondents also noted that they will be putting time into better end-user training to overcome some of the adoption difficulties related to hesitant staffers.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


