UT establishes patient-centered research center with $5M grant

February 19, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 19, 2014 - UT Southwestern Medical Center has received a $5 million grant from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) to establish their own Center for Patient-Centered Outcomes Research to support population health management strategies and community research.  The five-year grant will go towards expanding technical infrastructure, training programs, and collaborative community relationships, led by Dr. Ethan A. Halm, Chief of the William and Gay Solomon Division of General Internal Medicine and Chief of the Division of Outcomes and Health Services Research in the Department of Clinical Sciences.
“This new Center for Patient-Centered Outcomes Research will be the perfect complement to our efforts to accelerate progress in both ‘bench-to-bedside’ as well as ‘bench-to-trench’ research – translating findings into practice and populations,” said Dr. Robert Toto, Associate Dean for Clinical and Translational Research, Director of UT Southwestern’s Center for Translational Medicine, and Professor of Internal Medicine and Clinical Sciences.
The new PCOR Center will be one of seven institutions funded by AHRQ aiming to extend comprehensive healthcare services to underserved, low-income, and minority patients. “We chose this focus because patients who are poor, part of minority populations, or lack insurance have worse health outcomes, and resource-limited health systems are most in need of strategies to deliver clinically effective and cost-effective care,” Dr. Halm said. “Our projects will emphasize approaches that use EHRs to identify those at high risk of poor outcomes and system-based outreach programs to deliver high-quality, patient-centered care to those most in need.”
The Center will initially focus on three major projects, including an evaluation of strategies to help improve routine screenings for liver disease, the development of predictive analytics and algorithms to gauge patient risks of certain conditions, and a push to improve patient-centered care and outcomes for those with advanced cancers.
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
Three Finalists Named for $100,000 Population Health Prize
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
“Another of our goals is to increase the number of faculty, fellows, and residents interested in investigative careers in this exciting new applied research discipline,” Dr. Halm said.  The Center will provide extra research and training opportunities to university faculty and physicians at the UT Southwestern Medical Center to generate interest, experience, and enthusiasm for analytics work and population health management.
“Providers and patients need better information about the pros and cons of different alternative diagnostic and treatment strategies so that they can truly personalize care.” Our ultimate aim is to help people make well-informed, shared decisions about their health care that are based on high-quality evidence, their individual risk factors, as well as their values and preferences – something we call Personalized Medicine 2.0.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig Data AnalyticsPatient DataPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


