Precision Medicine in Action Brings Rare Disease Cures Closer

October 29, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 29, 2015 - Precision medicine has become a popular talking point this year after shining on the Presidential stage in January, but the process of harnessing the healthcare system’s growing insights into genomics and tailored therapies is more than just a theoretical buzzword. 
Researchers across the industry are putting their precision medicine ideas into action to address rare diseases that may not otherwise have a cure.
As the National Institutes of Health (NIH) waits to see if it will receiving funding for the Precision Medicine Initiative’s capstone million-patient databank, the White House is reiterating what researchers and healthcare providers already know: that precision medicine is primed for some major scientific and clinical breakthroughs in the near future.
Research and development, neurological diseases remain top White House priorities
The White House has been a steadfast backer of the precision medicine ecosystem during President Obama’s term in office, and the Administration has no plans to back down from fostering research during its final months in power. 
READ MORE: NIH Opens Up “All of Us” to Research Participants Nationwide
In a fact sheet released earlier in October, the White House stresses the importance of the Precision Medicine Initiative and the BRAIN Initiative, which focuses specifically on neurological diseases like Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and dementia.  Alzheimer’s alone produces a $200 billion yearly economic burden, three-quarters of which falls on Medicare and Medicaid to handle.
“The BRAIN Initiative has the potential to do for neuroscience what the Human Genome Project did for genomics by enabling a dynamic understanding of brain function,” the White House says. “A deepened knowledge of how brains work will help scientists and doctors diagnose and treat diseases more incisively, educate children more effectively, and develop novel technologies and devices to help alleviate the burdens of illness and injury.”
Moving away from the one-size-fits-all approach to treatment for cancer, hereditary diseases, and other conditions requires significant investment in big data analytics and genomics. In addition to the $215 million President Obama is requesting for the Precision Medicine Initiative in the 2016 budget, he will ask for $300 million to fund BRAIN Initiative activities.
“Precision medicine gives clinicians tools to better understand the complex mechanisms underlying a patient’s health, disease, or condition, and to better predict which treatments will be most effective – but the potential for precision medicine to improve care and speed the development of new treatments has only just begun to be tapped.”
Innovative big data analytics approach further categorizes Type 2 diabetes patients
READ MORE: AARP Invests $60M in Dementia, Alzheimer’s Disease Research
Researchers at Mount Sinai’s Icahn School of Medicine are applying big data analytics and precision medicine techniques to stratify Type 2 diabetes patients by subtype.  In a paper published this month in Science Translational Medicine, the researchers explain how genotype data from more than 11,000 patients is used to group Type 2 diabetes patients into three distinct disease groups associated with markedly different clinical outcomes.
Unique gene variants make group one diabetics more susceptible to diabetic nephropathy and retinopathy, while the second subtype was marked by the prevalence of cancer and cardiovascular disease, and the third by neurological disease, allergies, and HIV infections.
“This project demonstrates the very real promise of precision medicine to improve healthcare by tailoring diagnosis and treatment to each patient, as well as by learning from each patient,” said Joel Dudley, PhD, senior author on the paper and Director of Biomedical Informatics at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.
“Our approach demonstrates the potential to unlock clinically meaningful patient population subgroups from the wealth of information that is accumulating in electronic medical record systems. The unique genetic component of this study yielded high-priority variants for follow-up study in patients with type 2 diabetes,” added Dr. Ronald Tamler, co-author of the study and Director of the Mount Sinai Clinical Diabetes Institute, within the Mount Sinai Health System.
“The team’s results suggest an attractive alternative to the kind of large-scale, narrow phenotype studies that have produced limited success in explaining common, complex disease.”
READ MORE: NIH Recommends Precision Medicine Approach to Treat Alzheimer’s
VA awards $5 million grant to improve EHR data collection, precision monitoring
Precision medicine starts with having the right data at the right time for the right patient, says the Regenstreif Institute, and the Department of Veterans Affairs is hoping to foster these basic care competencies with a $5 million grant for a multi-site precision monitoring (PRIS-M) program.
"The VA is the single largest provider of health care in the United States with a wealth of patient information and a single unified electronic health record. It is ideally poised to apply precision monitoring to transform care and outcomes for veterans and to exert national leadership in this important area," said Linda S. Williams, MD, co-principal investigator of the new program, which will involve the Richard L. Roudebush VA Medical Center, the Regenstrief Institute and Indiana University School of Medicine.
The grant will support four precision monitoring initiatives, including nationwide deployment of electronic quality indicators for stroke, use of patient-specific data to identify and treat transient ischemic attack, remote monitoring of CPAP therapy in sleep apnea patients, and the reduction of inappropriate carotid artery imaging studies.
While the studies are focusing on reducing variations in standardized care rather than developing tailored therapies for patient-specific applications, the competencies gained from the grant program will help to improve EHR data access and test implementation strategies that will prepare researchers for the large-scale big data analytics required for additional research.
"There are a lot of data in the VA electronic health record, but it's hard to access and to work with without adequately prepared staff, who understand the clinical and technical aspects of our data," said Edward Miech, EdD. "Many VAs and other hospitals don't have this capability, so with PRIS-M we hope to develop and test tools and implementation strategies that make data accessible and beneficial when and where needed in ways that will help patients in the VA and eventually those in other facilities."  
“Exon skipping” opens promising avenues for treating severe form of muscular dystrophy
Training cells to skip over abnormal sections of genetic code could help children with Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy Type 2C, a rare but devastating form of muscular dystrophy, to remain independent of wheelchairs for longer, according to researchers at Northwestern University and the University of Chicago. 
In fruit fly and mouse models, exon skipping proteins could successfully stabilize and slow down progress of the disease, UChicago News reports.  The process can be performed in human cells from patients affected by the condition using antisense compounds, said lead investigator Elizabeth McNally.
“We recognize that this is version 1.0,” McNally said. “But if this can stabilize individuals with this disease, even if it gave them 10 more years of walking, that’s huge. That would also mean 20 to 30 more years of breathing, and that is hugely beneficial for the patients and for their parents who are caring for them. And, of course, we’re interested in developing version 2.0 that will be even better.”
The team published their initial findings in the Journal of Clinical Investigation this month.
Genetic testing brings diagnosis, cure to toddler with rare neurodegenerative disease
A nearly-two-year old girl has become one of the youngest patients diagnosed with Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere Syndrome 2 (BVVLS2), a progressive and often fatal degenerative neurological disorder that is often only caught too late.
After the child’s symptoms were mistaken for an autoimmune disease, physicians at Duke University Hospital partnered with Columbia University Medical Center to sequence her genome, leading to the discovery of genetic mutations that result in severe riboflavin deficiency.  The deficiency is often not caught on regular blood tests.
After the results of the genetic test were confirmed, the patient received oral riboflavin supplements that helped to improve her condition within weeks.  Physicians expect the improvements will be long-lasting.
"Being able to diagnose a genetic disease doesn't always mean we're able to use what we know to treat or cure the patient, so this case was unusual," said study leader David B. Goldstein, PhD, professor of genetics and development and director of the Institute for Genomic Medicine at the Columbia University Medical Center, which partnered with Duke University to publish research on the case.
"Sequencing only tells us exactly what a patient has, and what to do therapeutically, a fraction of the time. But it happens often enough that it's worth doing on a routine basis. Our intention at Columbia is to ensure that any such patients have their genomes carefully interpreted.
The case “demonstrates how exome or whole genome sequencing can benefit patients,” Goldstein added. “As we learn more about the genetics of disease and discover new treatments, cases like this will become increasingly common."
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsChronic Disease ManagementMedical ResearchPrecision Medicine


