ONC Provides $1M in Grant Funding for HIE, Care Coordination

October 02, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 02, 2015 - The Office of the National Coordinator has announced the award of $1 million in grand funding to improve health information exchange and care coordination across the healthcare system, focusing especially on providers who have not been eligible for participation in the EHR Incentive Programs.
Ten healthcare organizations and programs have received funding to help them continue their efforts to integrate multiple sources of healthcare data into the care continuum, said ONC Chief Medical Officer Thomas A. Mason, MD in a blog post on HealthITBuzz.
“Within the health care system, which accounts for just 10 percent of health determinants, there are many important contributors from primary care physicians and surgeons, to nursing homes, behavioral health professionals, home health care organizations, public health departments, emergency medical services, social services, and many others,” Mason wrote.
“All of these providers work every day to ensure a comprehensive and inclusive approach to individual and community health. However, some providers are not eligible for incentives under the Medicare and Medicaid EHR Incentive Programs, so they haven’t received any funds to promote EHR adoption.  Nonetheless, it is important they receive support to ensure the health information they gather flows seamlessly for better individual health decision making.”
Dig Deeper
How Data-Driven Care Management Improves Population Health in NC
CVS Retail Clinics, VA Partner for Care Coordination, Access
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
Among the recipients of the grants are the National Healthy Start Association, Georgia Health Information Network, Rhode Island Quality Institute, Utah Department of Health, and the Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System. 
The awards are intended to encourage the development of “an interoperable learning health system—truly linking the traditional health care system with community and social support— resulting in healthier people and communities,” Mason says.  “This new investment will help increase adoption and use of electronic health information in a manner that is appropriate, standardized, secure, timely, and reliable for both senders and receivers.”
“It will be through these innovative community projects that awardees will collaborate with providers who are not receiving Medicare and Medicaid EHR Incentive Program funds,” he concluded.  “These efforts will support the goals of a nationwide learning health system where data is harmonized across organizations and available to the right people at the right time and in the right place to create healthy individuals and communities.”
Tagged Care CoordinationHealth Information ExchangePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


