NY launches research partnership for healthcare analytics

October 01, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 01, 2013 - New York State is bringing together a consortium of public entities, academic research centers, and private companies to turn big data into collaborative data, according to a press release.  The New York Hub for Emerging Applications in Life Sciences (NY HEALS) will let physicians and researchers access advanced analytics capabilities, including IBM’s Watson supercomputer, to help identify diseases, develop treatments, and create personalized programs for patients across the country.
“This new collaboration is another example of New York’s exemplary public and private academic institutions working hand in hand with the private sector to grow our state’s innovation economy,” Governor Andrew M. Cuomo said while launching the collaborative. “As NY HEALS demonstrates, our state continues to lead the way in developing cutting edge public-private partnerships, and advancing effective health solutions for a wide variety of diseases. I applaud the founding members of NY HEALS for coming together to make new progress in the fields of science and medicine, while also growing our economy.”
Founding members of the collaborative include Albany Medical Center, several branches of the State University of New York (SUNY), Buffalo Niagara Medical Campus, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), and private organizations such as IBM, the Wadsworth Center, and the Jacobs Institute.
“The world-class intellectual and physical resources being engaged through this collaboration will firmly position New York as a home for next-generation medical technologies and first-class patient care,” said L. Nelson (Nick) Hopkins, M.D., CEO of the Jacobs Institute. “The Jacobs Institute is delighted to join with our esteemed partner institutions on this important initiative that will enable new approaches to identifying, treating, curing, and preventing disease, while cementing the state’s role as a nexus for cutting-edge life sciences education and research.”
Dig Deeper
Machine Learning Identifies Ovarian Cancer with 91% Accuracy
AMA, Patient Groups Join “All of Us” Precision Medicine Outreach
Six Pediatric Hospitals Create Personalized Medicine Coalition
NY HEALS will focus on using data-driven strategies to advance research in a variety of areas, including combining brain mapping software with sensor data to address Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, examining genetic and environmental factors to develop disease-specific therapeutics for cancer patients, and exploring improvements in clinical decision support systems to aid population health management.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceHealthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation Health Management


