Clinical Decision Support Guidelines Cut Unneeded Angioplasty

November 10, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 10, 2015 - Unnecessary and rarely appropriate angioplasty procedures are occurring less often thanks to a concerted effort to educate providers about clinical guidelines for the cardiovascular treatment, says a study published this month in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA). 
Providers performed close to 30,000 fewer non-acute percutaneuous coronary interventions (PCIs) between 2010 and 2014 after several prominent professional organizations, including the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology, released best practices guidelines for the industry.
Using data from the American College of Cardiology’s National Cardiovascular Data Registry CathPCI, researchers examined 2.7 million PCI procedures from 766 hospitals nationwide that took place between 2009 and 2014.  The registry is the largest centralized collection of diagnostic cardiac catheterization and PCI, and collects detailed data on cardiac testing, procedure results, and clinical characteristics from more than 1500 participating organizations.
“The appropriateness of PCI has garnered attention from clinicians, insurers, and policy makers,” state the authors, who hail from Yale University School of Medicine, Yale Health System, and several other university medical schools in Colorado, Michigan, Missouri, and North Carolina.
“It has been the subject of national quality improvement initiatives and incorporated into pay-for-performance programs. In our analysis, the observed reductions in inappropriate PCI appeared to accelerate in 2011, which coincided with the publication of a high-profile report on PCI appropriateness, the National Cardiovascular Data Registry’s inclusion of procedural appropriateness in its benchmarking reports, and the launch of national performance improvement campaigns.”
READ MORE: How Big Data Velocity Informs Population Health, Patient Safety
The study found proportion of rarely appropriate procedures for non-acute conditions declined from 26.2 percent to 13.3 percent over the study period, representing a greater than 50 percent drop in procedures previously classified as inappropriate.  Previous studies had found that one out of every six non-acute PCIs were deemed inappropriate for the situation.
“We observed significant declines in the proportions of patients undergoing nonacute PCI who were asymptomatic or had minimal symptoms; who were not receiving or receiving only minimal antianginal therapy; and who had low- or intermediate-risk findings on noninvasive testing,” the study reports.
Among the best-performing hospitals, fewer than six percent of non-acute PCIs were classified as inappropriate in 2014.
While the significant reductions in unnecessary procedures are viewed as a positive result for the industry at large, there was notable variation in the improvement rate across different healthcare organizations.  Many of the hospitals with the highest initial rates of inappropriate procedures reduced their numbers to less than ten percent, but others maintained much higher rates of unnecessary services, hovering between twenty and thirty percent.
"The most important finding from our study is that it shows that the practice of interventional cardiology has evolved over a short period of time, and it appears that we are doing a better job of selecting patients who are more likely to benefit from having a stent procedure," said Nihar R. Desai, MD, MPH, lead author of the study and an assistant professor of medicine at Yale School of Medicine in a press release.
READ MORE: Geisinger, Baylor Granted $3.5M for Patient Safety Learning Lab
"At the same time, we're doing a better job of documenting the reasons why a stent procedure is indicated."
However, that documentation remains incomplete due to the relatively small number of organizations contributing data to the registry, noted Robert A. Harrington, MD, chair of the department of medicine at Stanford University School of Medicine, in an accompanying editorial.  “Not all hospitals that perform angioplasty contribute data to the NCDR," he said. "Second, more emphasis must be placed on achieving interoperability across health care systems” that will enable the flow of clinical data for big data analytics.
While cardiologists have been willing to contribute patient data to research projects to the extent that they are able, a national quality registry system and real-time clinical decision support tools would significantly aid the process of ensuring patients receive appropriate care, Harrington added. 
“Currently, data need to be specifically entered into the NCDR data systems and submitted periodically to the national registry,” he wrote. “Those NCDR data systems may or may not be part of the electronic health record of each hospital. Truly interoperable health care data systems are needed that allow real-time sharing of data across systems and reduce the need for additional or even duplicate data entry. Only then can there be real-time surveillance and point-of-care clinical support systems using the most up-to-date data and analyses.”
The study may be somewhat limited by the fact that providers have changed the way they document the severity of symptoms and the appropriateness of procedures since 2010, when the study began, but Desai notes that the project is one of the first of its kind to gauge the use and necessity of this class of treatments. 
READ MORE: Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
The authors conclude by suggesting that hospitals and professional organizations undertake ongoing performance improvement initiatives, more robust quality benchmarking, and the continued implementation of clinical decision support tools and strategies that may further reduce instances of inappropriate care.
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsHospital QualityPopulation Health Management


