AMA, Patient Groups Join “All of Us” Precision Medicine Outreach

November 22, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 22, 2017 - More than a dozen professional societies and patient advocacy groups have signed up to promote participation in the national Precision Medicine Initiative’s All of Us research program, announced the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
The organizations, including the American Medical Association, American Academy of Family Physicians, National Baptist Convention, and League of United Latin American Citizens, will receive a combined $1 million to support outreach and community education aimed at recruiting a diverse group of patients to contribute their data to the effort.
“We want to build long-term relationships with our participants based on transparency and trust. These organizations will help us in that effort,” said Eric Dishman, director of the All of Us Research Program at NIH.
Dig Deeper
Precision Medicine Sparks New Conversations about Patient Data
Precision Medicine Research a Top Strategic Priority for NIH
Precision Medicine Must Be a “Team Effort,” White House Says
“We will look to them for input about what their communities want and need, as we work to create a research program that’s meaningful for researchers and participants alike.”
The initiative has made a concerted effort to start collecting data from typically underserved patient populations with varying socioeconomic, ethnic, and racial backgrounds.
In August, the NIH unveiled a $13.8 million investment in healthcare providers serving Southern and Midwestern states, establishing three new recruitment networks at major rural and urban care sites.
“It’s been essential for us – from the very start — to have diverse voices at the table, weighing in on the best ways to engage and retain diverse communities in this program,” said Dara Richardson-Heron, MD, chief engagement officer of the All of Us Research Program, about the latest collaborations.
“These organizations will help us take things to the next level. They bring a wealth of experience and deep connections to their communities. It’s a privilege to welcome them to our network.”
Participants in the program can share their personal health data through blood and urine samples, physical measurements, electronic health records, and even wearables and Internet of Things devices, the NIH says.
Researchers from academia, the healthcare industry, and even the public will be able to request no-cost access to deidentified data to fuel new breakthroughs in precision medicine, personalized care, and population health management.
The agency will work with HCM Strategists to administer the partnerships, the NIH added.
“The organizations will conduct a variety of activities as part of their involvement in the program, which may include holding events, gathering public input, training program ambassadors, leading social media campaigns, developing additional messaging that speaks to the value of participation for their communities and offering continuing education credits for health care providers,” said Ronnie Tepp, HCM’s principal investigator.
The All of Us initiative is currently in its beta testing phase, Dishman has said.
“As with every aspect of the program, we’re starting small with enrollment and scaling up carefully as we go, beginning with one site and gradually expanding to more than 100 sites nationally during the beta phase,” he wrote in a recent blog post.
“Our beta testers will help us find problems with our systems and processes, so we can fix them and improve the experience for everyone going forward.  And most importantly, they will help us evaluate and improve our messaging, our engagement approaches, and our relationship building with diverse communities across the country.”
During the beta test, Dishman hopes to gather data from 10,000 patients.  The process will help to establish best practices and uncover any issues with recruitment, patient privacy, data storage, or community education before expanding.
The program is slated to roll out nationally in the spring of 2018, with the ultimate goal of gathering genomic, clinical, and lifestyle data from at least one million individuals.
The full list of organizations participating in this part of the collaboration includes: the American Academy of Family Physicians, American Academy of HIV Medicine, American Association of Colleges of Nursing, American Medical Association, Arab Community Center for Economic and Social Services, Asian & Pacific Islander American Health Forum, Association of Nurses in AIDS Care, Black Women’s Health Imperative, Cobb Institute (W. Montague Cobb/National Medical Association Health Institute), League of United Latin American Citizens, National Baptist Convention, National Hispanic Medical Association, National Minority Quality Forum, and UnidosUS.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsGenomicsMedical ResearchPersonalized MedicinePopulation Health ManagementPrecision MedicinePrecision Medicine Initiative


