Physicians are misusing colonoscopies for cancer screenings

October 08, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 08, 2014 - Colonoscopies are overused for colorectal cancer screenings in patients with lower risk levels, according to a new study from Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, but aren’t used often enough for high-risk patients.  Endoscopists disagree on the usefulness of national guidelines, says senior study author Thomas D. Sequist MD, MPH, BWH Division of General Medicine and Primary Care, leading to increased costs for unnecessary invasive tests.
“Our study shows that a high percentage of follow-up colonoscopies are being performed too early, resulting in use of scarce health care resources with potentially limited clinical benefit,” Sequist said.  “Previous research has shown that most endoscopists do not consistently agree with the follow-up intervals recommended in national guidelines and report preferences for shorter screening and surveillance intervals.”
The retrospective study, published online in the Journal of General Internal Medicine, examined a cohort of 1,429 patients aged 50 to 65 who had their first colonoscopies between 2001 and 2010.  The researchers then observed follow-up colonoscopies for a median of six years.  They found that 88% of follow-up screenings and 49% of surveillance colonoscopies represented overuse according to clinical guidelines.  Many tests were performed three or four years earlier than is recommended on lower risk patients, but one quarter of higher risk patients did not receive a follow-up colonoscopy within the three-to-five year window recommended by experts.
“The overused colonoscopies on the patients in this study alone represent a potential excess of over $1 million in health care spending-resources that might benefit those who are overdue for colon cancer screening,” said Gina Kruse, MD, Massachusetts General Hospital, lead study author.  Patients were thirteen times more likely to undergo an early colonoscopy when it was ordered by an endoscopist.
Dig Deeper
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
Value Proposition Hard to Find for Care Coordination Tools
Dental Care is the Missing Piece of Population Health Management
As healthcare organizations seek to balance population health management with accountable care that rewards judicious use of expensive services, clinical guidelines for expensive tests such as colon cancer screenings may become increasingly important to follow.  The American Gastroenterological Society and the American Board of Internal Medicine Foundation have partnered to encourage physicians to reduce the number of screenings they order for lower risk patients in order to reduce wasteful spending.
“There are likely multiple drivers of recommendations for early colonoscopy, including disagreement with current guidelines, fear of poor patient outcomes or malpractice, or misaligned financial incentives,” Sequist said.  “Examining practice variation and establishing locally endorsed standards among endoscopists may be a way to target interventions to reduce overuse.”
Tagged Accountable CarePopulation Health Management


