Why do docs think mHealth is useless for patient monitoring?

September 22, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 22, 2014 - Fitness trackers and smartphone mHealth apps have been enjoying a huge surge in popularity as shiny new technologies attract the consumer eye, but physicians are still not sold on the benefits of mHealth to truly improve patient health, according to a new survey by Deloitte.  Despite studies and pilots that show the potential for mobile communications to improve relationships with providers and bolster population health management programs, just 38% of physicians believe that adherence and patient monitoring are a potential benefit of the mHealth spectrum.
The low percentage is notable for two reasons: firstly, because it contrasts sharply with the 60% of consumers who want to use mobile health technologies to keep track of their fitness, sleep, or chronic diseases, and secondly because the vast majority of physicians are eager to embrace smartphones and other devices for clinical uses that make their jobs easier.
Nine out of ten physicians agreed that they are interested in mHealth technology and that it has clinical value, even if they were not adopters.  Three-quarters of mHealth users and 59% of non-users believe accessing clinical information during a patient encounter is one of the primary benefits of mHealth, while similar numbers like the ability to perform research on specific conditions, interventions, or medications while making clinical decisions.  Sixty-three percent of users and 48% of non-users would use mHealth for catching up on journal articles and news items or for engaging in continued medical education.
So why don’t physicians believe that patient monitoring through mHealth is a worthwhile goal?  As with so many other issues plaguing the healthcare system, it might come down to a lack of communication.  A recent report by Mobiquity found that while up to 70% of consumers engage in the use of wristbands or smartphones to track at least one long-term health issue such as weight gain or exercise, just 40% have shared that data with their physicians.  Eleven percent of those patients who kept their data to themselves are afraid that their physicians won’t take them seriously if they proffer the information.
Dig Deeper
CMS Reform Model Fosters Care Coordination, Population Health
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
National Health IT Week Brings Celebration, Educational Events
Providers and patients may be caught in an mHealth catch-22.  If providers were more welcoming of patient-generated data, patients might be more willing to offer it.  If patients are more willing to share, providers may end up becoming more comfortable with the notion of using mHealth data to monitor health and make clinical decisions, and could start seeing more value in the data.  But mutual distrust and a lack of understanding and comfort with the patient-provider relationship might be keeping unnecessary siloes firmly in place.
Part of the problem could be that EHR systems are not yet optimized to accept large volumes of patient-generated health data (PGHD), and physicians fear becoming overwhelmed by useless statistics that don’t actually benefit the patient.  Yet another mHealth survey, this one by eClinicalWorks, found that a whopping 93% of physicians would be more likely to embrace mHealth apps if they were better integrated with their EHRs, and that the marriage of clinical systems with PGHD could be the key to improving outcomes.
“There’s a huge opportunity for medical professionals, pharmaceutical companies and health organizations to use mobile to drive positive behavior change and, as a result, better patient outcomes,” said Scott Snyder, Mobiquity’s President and Chief Strategy Officer. “The gap will be closed by those who design mobile health solutions that are indispensable and laser-focused on users’ goals, and that carefully balance data collection with user control and privacy.”
  Tagged Accountable CareEHR and Patient EngagementGlobal mHealthPopulation Health Management


