CMS Hosts Help Session for Physician Quality Reporting System

August 04, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 04, 2016 - CMS is holding virtual “office hours” for providers who are unsure how to successfully attest for the 2016 Physician Quality Reporting System.  The first of three online sessions focused on PQRS reporting will take place on Tuesday, August 16 from 1:00 to 2:00 PM Eastern time.
“Topics to be discussed in this session include How to Get Started with PQRS and what are claims/qualified registry clinical quality measures,” CMS said in an email announcement. “This PQRS Virtual Office Hours session will allow stakeholders an opportunity to ask a CMS representative questions about how to get started with quality measures for 2016 PQRS reporting.”
PQRS is an often-overlooked regulatory program that nonetheless forms a major piece of CMS quality improvement efforts.  Failure to meet PQRS requirements carries significant Medicare payment penalties – up to 2 percent of reimbursements in 2018. 
In 2015, more than 470,000 eligible professionals lost 1.5 percent of their Medicare reimbursements due to non-participation in calendar year 2013, when the pressures of meaningful use seemed to overshadow many other initiatives.
Dig Deeper
Why an “Empty Desire” for Big Data is Inhibiting Value-Based Care
AHRQ to Grant $5M for Big Data Patient Safety Learning Labs
Yale, Epic Partner to Boost Healthcare with Big Data Analytics
Data from the PQRS program is also used to calculate scoring for the Value-Based Modifier program.  These two programs, along with the EHR Incentive Programs, comprise the three major pillars of the nation’s systemic reform efforts.
The PQRS framework is intended to promote standardization of care.  Participants report on data across the six major quality domains included in the National Quality Strategy, including patient safety, patient experiences, population health management, and care coordination.
Eligible providers can report their data individually or through a group reporting option, and may use qualified PQRS registries, certified EHR technology, or qualified clinical data registries to submit their information.
The first PQRS office hour session will focus on the basics of quality measurement, CMS says. 
“Only questions related to the 2016 PQRS claims/registry individual measures or measures groups will be addressed on this call. All other questions, including questions regarding program requirements and policy or reporting requirements, should be directed to the QualityNet Help Desk.”
Space for the seminar is limited.  Registration opens on August 8 at 12:00 PM Eastern time.  Interested parties may complete their registration by clicking here.
Tagged Clinical Quality MeasuresPhysician Quality Reporting SystemValue Based Care Reimbursement


