Five Tips for Making the Most of ICD-10 Specificity Changes

October 12, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 12, 2015 - ICD-10 is a learning process.  Far from being a one-and-done crisis that started and ended on October 1, the industry is going to be spending the next few months – or years – coming to grips with what the upgraded code set really means for their revenue cycle, their productivity, their organizational relationships, and their ability to leverage the increased detail and specificity for visionary projects like big data analytics and population health management.
Most organizations have already submitted their first batch of ICD-10 claims, and may be anxiously awaiting the first round of payments or denials, which will help them gauge their potential shortfalls and problem areas. 
But providers shouldn’t panic if they receive less-than-optimal results during this initial transition period.  There is plenty of time to invest in continuing coder education, clinical documentation improvement programs, and additional strategies to raise revenue, guard against unexpected shifts, and make the most out of the new code set’s opportunities for better health information management.
To achieve long-term success with ICD-10, Mary Reeves, RHIA, Assistant Vice President, HIM Operations and CDI at Regional HealthCare Partners, suggests that healthcare organizations make sure they have a firm grip on some often overlooked ICD-10 essentials. 
At the 2015 AHIMA Convention in New Orleans last month, Reeves sat down with HealthITAnalytics.com to discuss how healthcare organizations can best cope with ICD-10’s detail and specificity changes to reap the benefits of the upgraded code set.
READ MORE: Data Governance Key to Hospital’s Natural Language Query Project
Move towards more structure in the EHR with templates
“Using the electronic health record is going to be more important than ever, because that’s where the documentation will be,” Reeves said. “Some of the most important information for coding is in the daily progress note, and providers have to be sure that we are capturing the complete clinical picture of the patient.”
“The best strategy is a templated EHR note that has structured, dropdown boxes as well as a section for a narrative note,” she added. “Dropdown boxes can be very helpful, but they can’t really answer the question, ‘What’s wrong with the patient?  Why are they here?’  If that was a dropdown, it would be a mile long to capture all of the possibilities.”
Radio buttons and dropdowns might not be the most effective way to standardize data in many clinical situations, but a combination of very structured data elements and a narrative note to add depth and detail to the patient’s story can combine for completeness and accuracy.  Customizable EHR templates are the best way to achieve this balance, Reeves believes.
“If you don’t have all the templated notes, it can be very complex to create a document that captures everything you want without creating a ten-page monstrosity,” she said. “You’re probably going to have to have notes that are driven by the DRG or the diagnosis of the patient. Those have to be selected and used correctly.”
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
“And if you don’t have really sophisticated templates in place yet, dictate a progress note,” she suggests. “It’s better than a handwritten note, and you can find transcription companies that will do a two-hour turn around, or something very quick like that.  That way the note is there. It’s in the electronic medical record. And it can have more detail to it.”
“Physicians do a more complete job when they can dictate the information, and once they get used to giving that level of detail in the note, you can train them in more standardized ways of capturing that.”
Understand the importance of detail and the use of unspecified codes
One of the major benefits of the wealth of new codes included in ICD-10 is the potential for incredibly detailed documentation.  While many providers are complaining about the flip side of this – more codes means more time and effort to find exactly the right one – the specificity of ICD-10 may bring important benefits to patient care, including a richer dataset for big data analytics and population health management, plus a more nuanced understanding of how diseases develop and express themselves.
But how granular should ICD-10 really be?  The proper use of certain ICD-10 codes, including unspecified codes, has been a battleground for stakeholders over the past few years, and a poorly understood one, at that.
READ MORE: Healthcare Big Data Success Starts with the Right Questions
“There’s still a lot of confusion about how to code in the clinic versus how to code in the hospital setting,” Reeves observed. “The rules are very different in the hospital, where billing is based on DRGs, versus the clinic, which uses CPT codes.”
“And there’s a lot of confusion for physicians. I think HIM directors and the hospitals are going to have to be very engaged in talking about how to document in the hospital, and also with educating them about the differences in the coding, because it can be confusing to physicians.”
For example, “physicians don’t always understand that ICD-9 allows you to use ‘probably, possible, and suspected’ with the final diagnosis in the hospital setting,” she explained.  “But you can’t do that in physician practice.”
“You can no longer use the phrase ‘patient is unstable.’  That’s one of the things you hear over and over and over again.  Or ‘the patient has altered mental status.’ That’s another one that they love to use. You can’t code those.  There’s nothing in ICD-10 that lets you code those phrases.”
That doesn’t mean that providers should gear up for a lifetime of scrolling through endless code choices to find the right one, or that they should commit to diagnoses that aren’t supported by the evidence just for the sake of assigning a very specific code.  In fact, CMS has warned against this practice many times during the ICD-10 preparation period. 
Most providers will still be using a small subset of common codes for their most popular diagnoses, Reeves said.  “When we went through our ICD-10 education we really tried to stress the fact that specialists are still going to have their top ten or fifteen codes that they’re going to use,” she said.  “You do not have to learn 5000 new codes.”
“Early on, I think a lot of people thought they were going to have to learn that many codes. Orthopedics is really the only area that’s going to create a high number of new codes, and that’s mostly due to the laterality issue.  But we’ve found that orthopedic surgeons are already very good about documenting left and right in most situations, so that may not be too much of a roadblock.”
Don’t let the flexibility rule compromise your efforts
When CMS and the American Medical Association announced their joint effort to make ICD-10 implementation easier with a flexibility provision, many stakeholders might have hoped to see a full-fledged grace period come into effect.  But the agreement is somewhat more limited than the one Representative Diane Black (R-TN) had submitted for consideration.
In fact, the flexibility rule doesn’t really provide all that much leeway at all.  Providers must still code the first three digits of ICD-10 codes correctly in order to avoid an automatic denial for Medicare claims.  Claims can still be denied for other reasons – and private payers are not bound to honor CMS’ agreement.
“The flexibility rule is somewhat bothersome to me, because I think it gives people another excuse not to really get with it and code the way we’re supposed to,” stated Reeves.  “I understand that it was a necessary compromise from a political perspective, maybe, but if you already have to get the first three digits of the code correct, why not just do the whole thing?  You’re going to have to learn how to do it anyway.”
“No one wants to anyone to have any financial repercussions from this. That is definitely important.  But I think a lot of people are thinking, ‘Oh, that means I don’t have to worry about this for another year.’ Not true.”
See ICD-10 from the physicians’ perspective
After little more than a week of ICD-10 implementation, complaints are already rolling in from physicians who feel aggrieved by the extra burden of the new coding system.  Technical problems with payers, long waits on the phone for queries, and initial hiccups with learning and using documentation software were expected outcomes of the first few weeks or months of the new era, but the sour attitudes and ruffled features of some providers are a little more difficult to smooth out.
“Physicians mostly just want to practice medicine,” said Reeves.  “They don’t want to be bothered by this.  That attitude doesn’t mean they’re not good physicians.  It just means that they’re busy, and this is one more thing that you’re asking them to do.  They don’t have the time.”
Physicians may feel like ICD-10 is a nuisance, but it will have a major impact not only on the way they document care, but on how they will get paid for their efforts.  There may be some positive aspects to ICD-10 lurking in the wings, Reeves said.  The trick is being able to explain them to physicians in a way that means something immediate and tangible to them.
“In some situations – especially in orthopedics and neurosurgery, for example – physicians may be doing procedures that they’re not getting compensated for correctly, because they don’t have a code to describe that situation in ICD-9,” she points out.
“Physicians need to understand that ICD-10 is how you demonstrate the severity level of your patient,” she added.  “A lot of surgeons are not very good at that. They might say, ‘Well, I don’t treat congestive heart failure. I don’t treat diabetes. I go in and I do surgery and I make you better.’  It’s tough for surgeons to see the patient’s big picture sometimes, because that’s not necessarily what they’re trained to do.  So they might have to work on that if they want to communicate why a complication happened or something like that.”
“I’ve seen data from patients who die in hospitals, and their records indicate that they were at the lowest severity and the lowest risk of mortality.  Typically, that’s because it wasn’t documented correctly, and it can look really bad for surgeons who did everything they could for very sick patients. There were just some missing gaps in the documentation and, therefore, it wasn’t coded completely and accurately. So it all goes back to that in the end.”
More complete and accurate documentation and coding will only become more important as patient outcome data continues to be publicly reported.  As consumers get choosier about their physicians and CMS releases more information on clinical rankings, providers will find that their documentation is directly affecting their reputation in a new and meaningful way.
Ensure data integrity and access to the right information
ICD-10 will drastically increase the volume of data available to researchers and big data analysts, but quantity does not equal quality, and existence doesn’t equal access.  Health data interoperability will continue to be a major challenge for organizations hoping to leverage ICD-10’s bounty of new information for population health management or medical research, and it can be a significant problem for day-to-day patient care, as well.
“I had an orthopedic surgeon say to me, ‘I do not know anything about this patient’s congestive heart failure, and I don’t have access to their cardiology records.  I don’t know how to find that information,’” Reeves recalled. 
“The cardiologist is the one that probably has the diagnostic information about the patient’s congestive heart failure, and that may not have been sent on to the orthopedist due to the fragmented nature of EHRs and the lack of health information exchange.”
That can leave patients at risk for safety errors, and it can make effective care coordination impossible.  Reeves recommends that the health information management department step in, when necessary, to ensure that providers have all the information they need to make the best possible decisions with their patients.
“I’ve even recommended that CDI experts take on a support role to help get that information, if it’s not available for the surgeon,” she said.  “They should offer to communicate with the cardiologist, and collect all that information when necessary.”
“We’ll get to the point where all this data is available at your fingertips in the EHR, but it will take a while,” she predicts.  “We may have to put the effort into doing it manually for a long time.”
A strong data governance plan must form the core of these efforts, Reeves stated.  While physicians “want to do what’s right,” she said, technology often gets in the way, leading to undesirable shortcuts and workarounds that can have a long-term effect on data quality.
“Copy-and-paste documentation is a byproduct of EHRs, and there’s been a lot of literature about its overuse,” Reeve said. “There’s a certain level of frustration about the use of copy-and-paste, because it makes the documentation easier.  But making it easier doesn’t necessarily mean it’s complete and accurate.”
“You need a policy that addresses when it can and can’t be used. For example, you can’t bring over a history and physical from a previous admission and copy and paste it into a second admission. I’ve seen that happen over and over again.  So a policy about copy-and-paste is a very important part of any set of data integrity and data governance principles.”
Developing a data governance policy must be an interdisciplinary effort, she added, in order address the maximum number of problems in the most collaborative way.  “It has to be vetted across the organization, or you’re never going to get buy-in,” she points out.  “Then, there has to be a way to implement it and monitor it. It’s just not one of those policies you write and put up in your folder or notebook away to pull out when Joint Commission comes. It has to be a living, breathing policy.”
“The HIM department’s role is to monitor that and be sure there is adherence to that policy,” she added.  “It’s a very important role for our profession, and especially now that ICD-10 is live and bringing a lot of these issues to the forefront of clinical care.”
Tagged AHIMA 2015Best PracticesEHR ChecklistsHealth Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


