Despite EHR Patient Portals, Providers Still Charge for PHI

January 09, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
Patient portals have not done much to reduce the practice of charging copying fees for patient medical record access.
January 09, 2015 - Despite the growing prevalence of EHR adoption and online patient portals, healthcare organizations still widely charge patients fees for access to their own personal health information and medical records.  A nationwide AHIMA survey of health information managers found that more than half of HIM departments collect fees for digital copies of health information, while close to two-thirds charge for paper duplicates of medical records.  While most facilities charged less than $1.00 per page, the practice has come under increasing scrutiny as federal regulators place increasing emphasis on patient engagement, care coordination, and the unrestricted flow of critical health information.
“Patient-centered healthcare initiatives are underway to enable patients to take more responsibility for their healthcare. To do so, patients must be able to access and share their health information,” writes Kim Murphy-Abdouch, MPH, RHIA, FACHE, in the study published in Perspectives in Health Information Management.  HIPAA requires healthcare organizations to allow patients to access their health data, while the HITECH Act adds that electronic copies of the information must be available.  While HIPAA states that providers may charge a “reasonable” fee for access to data, the fee should be calculated based on the actual cost of providing the information, and cannot exceed those costs or the maximum amount set by many individual states.
EHR adoption was widespread among the 313 respondents to the survey, with 87.5% stating that they are live on an EHR.  Thirty-eight percent also had patient portals, yet reported very low utilization.  Nearly half of the providers said that less than five percent of their patients have accessed the online tool.  Only one clinic was able to boast an access rate of more than 50 percent.  The survey did not ask the HIM professionals if they encouraged portal use as an alternative to manual copying of data before going ahead with the process.
The survey found significant variation in the way HIPAA and HITECH guidelines are applied in individual organizations.  While charges for paper copies were usually calculated by page, some organizations charged a flat fee for allowing a single device access to the data, while others transferred the per-page schema to electronic copies of information, as well.  Almost a quarter of providers stated that they follow their state’s fee structure to determine the charges instead of calculating the rate based on the actual cost of the process for their particular facility.  “This finding would appear to be inconsistent with HIPAA and HITECH requirements that patients may only be charged a ‘reasonable cost-based fee’ for copies of their medical records,” Murphy-Abdouch notes.
Dig Deeper
Apple Explores Medical Data with Health Records API, Patents
CPT, SNOMED-CT Codes Ally to Boost Healthcare Data Integrity
Change Healthcare Plans Payer, Provider RCM Blockchain Tool
Individual states have taken differing approaches to establishing calculations for what constitutes a reasonable fee.  In South Carolina, lawmakers recently decreed that healthcare providers can charge no more than a total of $150 for a particular patient’s records, no matter how many pages are included.  Florida, meanwhile, quadrupled its allowable charges by adjusting its pricing to a maximum $1 per page no matter how many pages are requested.  Previously, the state required providers to charge no more than $1 for the first 25 pages and 25 cents for any additional pages after that.
As patient portals and patient engagement features like Blue Button continue to spread throughout the industry, the HIM department is supposed to become less involved in shuttling patient information back and forth.  However, with such meager utilization rates reported by the majority of organizations, the per-page fee method is still very much in play.
“The healthcare industry is at a crossroad of converging technology and regulations influencing patients’ access to their personal health information,” Murphy-Abdouch concludes.  “This research demonstrates the opportunity for HIM professionals to facilitate adoption of patient portals. HIM professionals are well positioned to encourage patients to use a portal and can do so by discussing benefits of use, authenticating patient identity, teaching patients how to securely access their information, and helping them understand their record.”
“If a patient portal is not available or if patients choose not to use the portal, HIM professionals can assist by establishing a pertinent record set to give patients upon request,” she adds. “This pertinent record set could include summaries of care, laboratory tests, and radiology results and could serve as the starting point for giving patients access to their personal health information.”
Tagged Health Information ManagementPatient DataPatient Engagement


