CMS Big Data Chief Receives Information Transparency Award

June 05, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 05, 2015 - Niall Brennan, Chief Data Officer and Director of the Office of Enterprise Data and Analytics at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), has been chosen as the recipient of 2015’s Health Data Liberators Award, presented by the Health Data Consortium, a public-private partnership focused on making big data useful to the healthcare community. 
The award, presented at the Health Datapalooza conference in Washington, DC, highlights CMS’ ongoing efforts to increase data transparency and analytics that can help to improve outcomes and cut unnecessary spending.
"The American healthcare consumer is better served today thanks in large part to Niall's tireless, behind-the-scenes work to make public health data readily available and accessible, helping to refocus our system of care to be patient centered and more cost effective," said Chris Boone, PhD, Chief Executive Officer of HDC. "Through Niall's leadership and as the first Chief Data Officer at CMS, open data remains a priority within the federal government. We are excited to give this award to Niall, a longtime health data champion and Health Datapalooza contributor, and recognize his important work in making CMS a healthcare innovator."
Brennan took charge of the brand new Office of Enterprise Data and Analytics in November of 2014, and has overseen the recent release of large volumes of Medicare payment and service utilization data for public consumption and research purposes.   
Dig Deeper
State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
Opioid Awareness Week Focuses on Population Health Management
Social Media May Provide Big Data Insights into Drug Misuse
"It's an honor to be recognized by Health Data Consortium as a health data liberator," said Brennan. "I am extremely proud of the work CMS has done to expand the availability and utility of CMS program data to drive innovations that improve health and healthcare.”
“This includes the release in recent years of information on hospital changes, physician utilization, and prescription drug utilization, that are enabling innovation – both through the development of new tools and resources, and through research, quality improvement, and fraud protection, and the announcement this week at the Health Datapalooza of access to more granular CMS data in a secure, privacy-protected manner for entrepreneurs and innovators,” he continued. “CMS will continue to promote innovation through data use in order to improve lives."
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsHealth Data ManagementPopulation Health Management


