CMS Names ICD-10 Ombudsman, Provides Last-Minute Tips

September 02, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 02, 2015 - As yellow buses and backpacks take over the lives of children once again, CMS hopes the healthcare industry will be in the mood to get back to school itself by learning its ICD-10 ABCs.  With less than one month until the October 1, 2015 transition date, and no indication that lawmakers will declare an additional delay, CMS is urging healthcare providers to take advantage of its ICD-10 implementation resources before it’s too late.
As promised in the July ICD-10 flexibility announcement by CMS and the American Medical Association, the agency has named an ICD-10 ombudsman, Dr. William Rogers, to be “a one-stop shop for you with questions and concerns,” said CMS Acting Administrator Andy Slavitt, according to the AMA.  
Rogers, an emergency physician who leads the CMS Physician Regulatory Issues Team, may have his hands full with queries as the industry comes to grips with the reality of the complex and worrisome coding switch.  Providers may contact Dr. Rogers through the ICD-10 ombudsman email account at icd10_ombudsman@cms.hhs.gov.
“As with everything, this transition can be highly successful,” Slavitt assured the industry last week.  “There will be bumps and challenges—our job is to plan for them, too.”
Dig Deeper
As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
CMS Begins the Search for a Chief Health Informatics Officer
CPT, SNOMED-CT Codes Ally to Boost Healthcare Data Integrity
CMS has spent the last few weeks releasing quick reference guides and bite-sized educational tidbits for providers who may not have cultivated a detailed knowledge of ICD-10 requirements.  In addition to a series of specialty-specific quick reference guides, CMS has created a condensed “ABCs of ICD-10” infographic that covers the basic tasks for providers  in the remaining days before October 1.
The checklist encourages providers to assess impacts, be certain of systems readiness, and contact vendors to ensure that organizations can generate and code a claim, submit it to payers, and avoid potentially negative revenue cycle impacts from rejections or mistakes.
While the latest Medicare end-to-end testing week produced an 87 percent claims acceptance rate, healthcare stakeholders remain concerned about the industry’s ability to accurately code to a high degree of specificity, generate claims that will be accepted and adjudicated by Medicare and private payers, and weather any reimbursement delays or shortages due to improperly configured systems or unanticipated errors.
With a recent survey indicating that up to a quarter of small providers may not be prepared for the switch, despite assurances from CMS that claims will not be denied solely for minor coding errors, the ICD-10 transition remains a contentious and anxious prospect for many organizations.
“While much of the industry is nearing readiness, nearly one-quarter of physician practice respondents said they will not be ready by the October 1, 2015 deadline and another one-quarter were unsure,” warned Jim Daley, WEDI past-chair and ICD-10 Workgroup co-chair. “Without a dedicated and aggressive effort to complete implementation activities in the time remaining, this lack of readiness may lead to disruption in claims processing."
“It is critical to closely monitor industry progress and testing as we approach the compliance date to gauge what might occur on Oct. 1, 2015,” added Jean P. Narcisi, chair of WEDI. “In light of our most recent findings, we are hopeful that industry leaders take the necessary steps to help ensure that the transition to ICD-10 is completed with minimal disruption to the healthcare industry.”
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


