Genetic tests for breast cancer could bring cost reductions

December 31, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 31, 2013 - The annual cost of caring for breast cancer patients has stretched to nearly $14 billion, representing the largest proportion of all cancer expenditures, but a significant amount of those costs are related to treating the side effects of chemotherapy.  While tailoring treatments with the use of genetic testing has been shown to be effective both in improving quality of life and reducing spending, many payers do not yet reimburse for genetic tests.  A new study published in the American Journal of Managed Care examines the economic impact of genetic testing for this prevalent and deadly disease, urging payers to collaborate with providers to cut costs and improve outcomes.
“As the healthcare system works to find ways to pay for genomic technology and healthcare costs continue to trend upward, the potential cost savings and productivity gains associated with advances in genomic diagnostics and personalized treatment that avoid unnecessary and ineffective treatments are appealing,” writes study author Robert D. Lieberthal, PhD of Thomas Jefferson University in Pennsylvania.  The average cost for a genetic breast cancer profile ranges from $1960 to $4860, but tailored treatments that pinpoint the most productive chemotherapy with the fewest side effects can drastically increase the overall wellbeing of a patient, producing savings of up to $10,770 per quality-adjusted year of life.
Common side effects of chemotherapy include nausea and vomiting in 85% of patients, hair loss in 36 percent, and mucosal ulceration in 39% of patients.  Depression and anxiety were also common among cancer sufferers and add to the overall cost of treatment.  “For patients, these indirect costs play a significant role in treatment decision making,” Lieberthal says.  However, there has been a dearth of clinical evaluation taking into account these one-off costs, which has led payers to be wary of these anticipated but unquantified expenses.
“There is a great need for additional translational research, including both clinical and outcomes research,” he writes. “There is also an opportunity to develop tests that can inform treatment decisions for subpopulations for whom current tests are not applicable, such  as patients diagnosed with triple-negative breast cancer or those with ER-negative status. There may also be interest in comparative effectiveness research results from head-to-head trials comparing genomic tests and treatment outcomes.”
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
CancerLinQ Brings Big Data Insights to Oncology with FDA, NCI Partners
“Our key findings are that research in this area has been limited and is likely to consist primarily of modeling studies for the foreseeable future,” the study concludes.  “Additional funding, better outcomes data, and regulation are identified as barriers to adoption of this new technology. The cooperation of multiple stakeholders will be essential if genomic medicine is to reach its full potential.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient CareQuality Of Care


