Payers Wary of Outsourcing Big Data Analytics, Health IT Tasks

November 20, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 20, 2015 - Payers may be rapidly embracing the importance of big data analytics for population health management and cost-cutting measures, but they are not entirely willing to put their technologies completely in the hands of offshore service and software providers, says the latest Black Book poll. 
While health IT outsourcing will continue to play a major role in the development of payer infrastructure, exploding into a $60 billion market by 2017, security concerns and the potential for data breaches are keeping full, end-to-end outsourcing plans in check.
"Health insurance niche software and services vendors are once again offering outsourcing as a cure-all for organizational cost controls," said Doug Brown, Managing Partner of Black Book Research Group. 
However, “with concerns over hostile offshore locations and escalating health data security and privacy issues, fewer payers are entertaining having a third party overseas corporation between them and their IT nervous systems in 2016,” he added.
Dig Deeper
Lack of Talent, Direction Afflict Healthcare Data Analytics Plans
How the Healthcare “Value Chain” Leads to Big Data Analytics Success
Top Healthcare Business Intelligence Companies by Hospital Users
Outsourcing has both benefits and drawbacks for the insurance industry.  In March, Black Book found that almost 90 percent of payers were enlisting service partners to bulk up their population health management capabilities as they tried to position themselves for early success in a value-based reimbursement world.
“Payer contracting in these evolving areas has nearly doubled in just the past twelve months,” Brown said at the time. “The most significant opportunities for outsourcing service providers to support both public and private insurers lie within member analytics, population health, and claims processing modernization.”
The most recent survey predicts that the payer IT outsourcing market is slated to expand by as much as 40 percent over the next two years.  Ninety-three percent of plan representatives said they are likely to undergo at least one analytics outsourcing project by the beginning of 2017.
In 2015, just under two thirds outsourced two or more IT functions, but few payers are willing to put the entirely of their IT services into the hands of overseas partners.
Just five percent of large health plans are considering end-to-end outsourcing strategies in 2016, the poll found.  Three-quarters of respondents expressed hesitancy to make such a significant commitment to offshore vendors due to the possibility of costly data breaches and damaging security lapses.
"Recent data breaches in the health plan sector have IT outsourcing clients assessing confidence in their vendors' operations and procedures as a safeguard to ensuring member data privacy in an effort to avoid all that comes with a data breach," said Brown. 
Eighty percent of pending contracts during the end of 2014 and beginning of 2015 were delayed to give payers time to confirm their vendors’ security safeguards.
Those payers who are embracing the idea of shedding their in-house big data analytics, population health management, and analytics-as-a-service capabilities are demanding more accountability from their partners.  Brown expects that half of all health plans with outsourcing contracts will require significant risk sharing from their partners by 2018.
“Health insurance companies have been among the slowest to adopting outsourcing," he said. "However, shrinking margins, higher claim disbursement, and increasing competition have forced health insurers to look at outsourcing at this point in time to prove efficiencies and focus resources toward the core functions of product development and innovation."
Support and help desk features are among the most likely to be sent overseas.  In the next twelve months nearly eighty percent of payers are likely to contract with a vendor to provide desktop support services, and nearly 70 percent will delegate application support to other companies. 
In 2016 privacy and security projects, as well as cloud initiatives, are also slated to comprise around half of all new outsourcing initiatives for managed care organizations.
Other top outsourcing initiatives in 2015 include applications development (83 percent), remote infrastructure management and cloud infrastructure maintenance (64 percent), business intelligence, data warehousing, and big data analytics (23 percent) quality assurance and testing (19 percent), and professional IT management services (10 percent).
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligencePopulation Health Management


