BIDMC Informaticist Wins American College of Informatics Award

November 21, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 21, 2014 - Charles Safran, MD, FACMI, Chief of the Division of Clinical Informatics at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, has been chosen for the 2014 Morris F. Collen Award granted by the American College of Informatics.  The annual award recognizes achievements in the use of healthcare IT, clinical analytics, and communications technologies to improve the quality and delivery of patient care.
“I am honored to be following in such footsteps and build upon the solid foundation created by Warner and Howard,” said Safran, citing the two previous winners of the award, Warner Slack, MD, and Howard Bleich, MD. “The clinical informatics program has always been about the care and well-being of our patients and fellow citizens.”
“ACMI is proud to honor Charles Safran with the Collen Award,” said ACMI Chair Alexa McCray, PhD, of Harvard Medical School. “We congratulate Dr. Safran on his accomplishments in improving patient care at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard’s teaching hospitals and thank him for the clinical informatics leadership role he has played both throughout his career and recently during the creation of the CI subspecialty of medicine.”
Safran has served as President and Chairman of American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA) and Vice President of the International Medical Informatics Association, as well as chairing the Clinical Informatics concentration for Harvard Medical School’s master’s program in biomedical informatics and National Library of Medicine informatics fellowship.
Dig Deeper
Health Information Management Pros Need Security, EHR Data Skills
Academic, Research Orgs to Form Health Data, Informatics Center
“Basic Science” of Healthcare Big Data Analytics Still Needs Work
“Dr. Safran has had a profound impact on BIDMC and me personally,” said John Halamka, MD, BIDMC’s Chief Information Officer. “I began my career in his lab and first prototyped our BIDMC web-based systems under his mentorship.”
Tagged Healthcare Informatics


