Low-income patients much less satisfied with care quality

January 09, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 09, 2014 - Low-income patients in California are significantly less content with their healthcare experience than more wealthy residents of the state according to a new report by the Blue Shield of California Foundation.  Low-income patients report a higher prevalence of chronic diseases and a less satisfactory relationship with their care providers, with only 49% reporting a positive impression of the quality of their care.
The study, produced by Langer Research Associates, polled over 1000 Californians above and below 200% of the federal poverty level.  While 81% of the high-income patients reported having health insurance, only 33% of low-income participants said the same.  The low-income patients were much more likely to be of Latino descent and/or non-citizens.  Few were college graduates, 40% were unemployed, and nearly one in ten said that they receive most of their healthcare through the emergency room.  In contrast, half of the high-income patients identify as white and use private physicians as their main contact with the healthcare system.  They were significantly more likely to speak English as a first language at home and hold college degrees.
The demographic differences may affect the methods of care delivery, but they should not produce such disparities in the perception of quality of care.  Twice as many high-income patients self-reported their overall health status as “excellent or very good” as their low-income counterparts, and were about 20% more likely to say they usually see the same provider every visit and receive excellent quality of care.  Only 43% of low-income patients say they feel very well informed about their healthcare as compared to 55% of high-income respondents.
A significant number of low-income patients said they don’t typically trust the information their healthcare providers give them and don’t feel free to ask questions of their clinicians.  They also complained that providers don’t proactively ask if they have any concerns.  Only 37% think they have a great deal of control over the course of their own care compared to 50% of high-income residents.
Dig Deeper
Why Aren’t Hospitals Using Patient-Reported Outcomes Data?
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
“In terms of predicting positive patient-provider relationships, controlling for five variables renders income entirely non-significant: connectedness, continuity, the patient’s preferred language, use of health information technology and the level to which the patient feels informed about her or his health,” the report says. “The predictive power of income drops by half when these factors are taken into account, a major step on the road to more equitable care for low-income Californians in comparison with their higher-income counterparts.”
“Simply training providers to communicate better with their patients and encourage them to become more involved in their own care also can have a profound effect,” the study concludes. “Moreover, providing patients with information resources – for example a decision aid or a vetted website, video or pamphlet – has the potential for substantial benefits. Whatever the method, as the key elements of caregiving relationships improve, the gap in healthcare experiences between low- and higher-income Californians fades.”
  Tagged EHR and Patient EngagementHospital QualitymHealth and Population HealthPatient CareQuality Of Care


