$10 Medication Adherence Intervention May Reap 98% Return

April 03, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 03, 2015 - A medication adherence intervention targeted towards Medicaid children with asthma that costs just ten dollars per month could substantially increase use of daily corticosteroid therapy while saving millions for managed care plans and state Medicaid agencies, reports a study in the American Journal of Managed Care.
By improving chronic disease management and ensuring medication adherence for just 40 percent of asthmatic children prescribed a daily inhaler, patients could avoid emergency department visits and hospitalizations while producing health system savings of more than $95 per child each year.
Nearly seven million children – close to ten percent – in the US suffer with asthma, which is one of the leading causes of emergency department visits and preventable hospitalizations. According to CDC data, childhood asthma is responsible for 1.8 million ED visits and 1.3 million hospital outpatient visits per year, not to mention 400,000 hospital discharges after an average stay of close to four days.
As value-based reimbursements and quality programs begin to penalize for overutilization, improving chronic disease management has become a top priority for healthcare providers on the hook for hundreds of thousands of dollars in demerits.
Dig Deeper
CVS to Offer Nationwide Home Delivery of Prescription Drugs
Synchronized Pick-Up Boosts Medication Adherence Up to 13%
Better Medication Adherence May Bring $37 for Each Dollar Spent
To investigate methods of increasing medication adherence among lower-income children, researchers examined Medicaid claims data on more than 43,000 pediatric patients in fourteen southern US states prescribed coricosteroids in the form of a daily maintenance inhaler (ICSRx). “While daily preventive use of ICSRx can have a substantial impact in reducing adverse outcomes, real-world adherence to ICSRx among Medicaid-enrolled children is unfortunately quite low,” the researchers from Morehouse Medical School write.
For asthma patients, prioritizing use of daily maintenance medication instead of emergency rescue medication produces fewer ED visits and hospitalizations.  In 2013, the same research team found that just 33 percent of Medicaid-eligible children achieve a proper medication adherence ratio within three months of being prescribed an ICSRx.  Children who did not achieve a 50 percent ratio of maintenance prescription use to rescue medication use had a 21 percent higher chance of visiting the emergency department and a 70 percent higher risk of hospital admission.
By raising that medication adherence proportion to just 40 percent, the fourteen state Medicaid programs included in the study stand to save a total of $8.2 million per year. Increasing the medication adherence number to 80 percent would produce total annual savings of $57.5 million.
“If adherence to ICS-Rx is one key element of reducing exacerbations and adverse outcomes, are there indeed effective interventions to improve adherence?” the researchers ask. “Studies suggest that various approaches to asthma care management and self-management could be cost-effective.” The costs of previously piloted chronic disease management interventions included in the study range from $5 to $60 per child per month, and include programs focusing on education, controlling environmental trigger factors, and counseling for parents.
By designing an intervention program that falls on the lower end of the cost spectrum, the healthcare system could achieve at least a 98 percent return on the investment,” the research team calculates. In order to create such a program, state Medicaid agencies could harness the automated power of clinical analytics.
“Medicaid programs have unique access to almost real-time data from pharmacy claims across their entire Medicaid population, and could potentially create automated ICS-Rx adherence surveillance systems and rapid-cycle feedback loops with costs spread across entire populations,” the authors suggest. “These health information technology systems could potentially generate automatic provider and patient alerts for non-renewal of ICS-Rx, as well as alerts for asthma-related ED use.”
“Even small increments of increased ICS-Rx adherence would be cost saving. Greater impact could be achieved by linking the high-tech solutions (surveillance and alerts) to ‘high-touch’ solutions, such as primary care case management, community health workers, school nurse/clinic programs, and/or parental peer counselors and group support,” they add. “If effective large-scale interventions can be found, there may be substantial cost savings to be gained from increasing real-world adherence to ICS-Rx among Medicaid-enrolled children with asthma.”
  Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementMedication adherencePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


