Can cost clarity marry revenue analytics and accountable care?

November 19, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 19, 2013 - In healthcare, as in burger chains across the country, “bigger is better” is a credo that rings true in more ways than one.  And like those burger chains, hospitals sometimes feel that transparency about what goes into the end product may do more harm than good for their bottom line.  But in an era of payment reforms, increasing accountability, and choosier, more informed patients, some health systems are changing the way they handle their finances to maximize their revenue while providing higher quality care in a more open manner.
The 22 hospitals and 185 clinics of the Intermountain Healthcare system are doing something that most CFOs might balk at.  Led by Dr. Brent C. James, the Salt Lake City-based chain is building a financial analytics system that will take the “more is better” philosophy that has plagued healthcare for so long and turn it into the “better is better” ideology that is the basis for new payment reform models based on accountable care.  By quantifying the real cost of services rather than the inflated mark-up that insurance companies haggle over, James plans to help Intermountain save money and deliver high quality care in one fell swoop.
“In the past, the way to make money was to do more,” James explained to the Wall Street Journal. “Figure out how to do more surgeries, even if they’re unnecessary. Imagine instead that I get a per-member, per-month payment for a population of patients. I no longer have a strong financial incentive for doing more. If I find a way to save money by taking out waste, all the savings come back to me and my patients.”
Accountable care and value-based payment reforms are intended to help the process along.  Hospitals are beginning to feel the string of Medicare-based payment adjustments for quality metrics, and many are starting to invest in data analytics that can manage the revenue cycle while placing a strong emphasis on preventative population health management.  While 90% of hospitals surveyed by CHIME this summer claim to use some form of analytics to keep tabs on their costs and expenses, 34% added that revenue analytics simply isn’t a top priority for the executive board at the moment.
Payment reforms that tie reimbursements to value are still in their infancy, and hospitals with a sack full of competing initiatives might not feel able to divide their attention much further.  But that’s a mistake, James says. “The whole health-care world is shifting to having the care provider take over the financial risk. In that world, your survival depends on being able to manage your costs. We happened, by luck and circumstance, to get going on it early on.  It’s a race toward excellence.”
READ MORE: Providers Struggle with Time, Tools for Revenue Cycle Analytics
That excellence relies on letting patients know that healthcare is starting to work just like every other business, with goods and services that have a clearly defined cost that the consumer can see before investing.  Over the next two or three years, Intermountain will be quantifying the costs of common procedures like x-rays, colonoscopy screenings, and maternity care and posting those prices on their website for patients to see.
Can such openness about the real cost and real profit of healthcare services help patients and hospitals alike work towards reducing the enormously inflated costs of the country’s healthcare system?  James isn’t the only one to think so.  A study in the Journal of Managed Care published in September argues that price transparency is the key to preventing overutilization of expensive and unnecessary services.  Payers and providers set up an accountable care system that saw emergency room visits decrease by 8% in one trial, and all the providers involved saw a reduction in costs stemming from imaging overuse due to the standardization of pricing.
“To remain competitive in the post health care reform environment, these hospital-sponsored ACOs have to reduce overutilization of services and lower their pricing,” wrote study author Anthony Akosa, MD, MBA. “To improve overall cost, providers should partner with hospitals to reduce both utilization and unit cost of services. The lost revenue from reducing unit cost and decreasing overutilization of services could be recouped from the shared savings agreements with payers.”
James hopes, ironically, that there is enough waste currently in the system to justify investing such a huge amount to drive it out, and few would argue to the contrary.  The system is likely to cost “several hundred million dollars,” which includes true cost assessments and a data analytics system linked to the chain’s EHR systems. Accountable care is intended to slim down the bloated spending, but it requires openness from hospitals and a wealth of good data to analyze where savings are justified without compromising the quality of care.
“In many cases, what [hospitals] might find is that the treatments could be changed slightly to be less costly and keep patient outcomes the same or higher,” asserts Shane Pilcher, Vice President of Stoltenberg Consulting.  “Overall, it would drop the operating costs and produce more profit while having as good or better patient outcomes.  The savings realized could potentially be applied toward the budget for data analytics to allow the organization to increase their effectiveness.  It could help you grow your analytics tools and grow your resources so you can start moving down the maturity level of analytics to start doing bigger and greater things.”
READ MORE: Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
“If you know the true cost of providing care, you can ask yourself whether doing one thing is really more important than doing something else,” adds James.  “Once I get those costs, I can manage them the way I would if I were building an automobile or a washing machine.  Maybe we’ll be able to move health care out of the dark ages.”
  Tagged Accountable CareHealthcare Business IntelligenceQuality Of CareRevenue Cycle Management


