Western NY Beacon shares lessons for diabetes management

December 17, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 17, 2013 - Diabetic patients in upstate New York have gotten some significant help managing their conditions from the Western New York Beacon Community (WNY Beacon) and regional health information exchange HEALTHeLINK.  After working with nearly 100 practices to implement EHRs and embrace health IT as a means of practice transformation, WNY Beacon has rapidly expanded HIE activity and patient participation while focusing efforts on educating diabetic patients and managing their needs from multiple angles.
As the national cost of diabetes treatment and management approaches $250 billion per year, WNY Beacon has released its final report outlining strategies for improving health and cutting costs for diabetics.
Expanding registries for better research and analytics
The first step in managing a problem is outlining its scope and impact.  By enrolling more than 40,000 patients from 238 primary care providers in diabetes registries, organizations have increased their ability to understand and codify the problem.  The added data has been able to reduce the number of uncontrolled diabetics by more than 10% at some practices, slashing costs and decreasing hospitalizations by 26% from 2009 to 2012.
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Addressing Opioid Abuse with Analytics, Population Health Strategies
Faulkner Guides Epic Systems from EHR to Comprehensive Health Record
“Compared to the overall trend in the WNY community, early-adopter Beacon practices prevented three hospitalizations for every 100 diabetic patients in 2012,” the report states.  “This translates to a savings of approximately $600 per diabetic patient per year.  If only 20% of the diabetic patients in Western New York were impacted, the estimated reduction in hospital costs would be $18 million per year.”
Improving real-time care coordination and communication
WNY Beacon launched a real-time medication alert pilot that allows providers to receive information on prescription changes after an emergency room visit or hospitalization.  “This program ensured that upon discharge, a comprehensive medication review would be performed and primary care providers would be notified of any and all recommended changes to a patient’s medication regimen,” the report says.  Six practices and one hospital system participated in the program, which added significant amounts of medication history data to HEALTHeLINK.
Patients at 57 practices were also given access to a patient portal, which allowed more than 700 diabetic patients to quickly and easily order medication refills, access lab results, and schedule appointments.  Patient portal use jumped from 12% in 2010 to 55% by the end of the program.  “It’s a nice way to reach out to the patients through a different medium to improve the one-on-one connection that we have where they can ask us questions and we can send them helpful information that may be good tools for the patient,” said Dr. Chad Szymanski of Wheatfield Family Medicine.
Patient education, telehealth, and population management
Helping patients take control of their own care by giving them self-management resources was the third arm to the project.  Five thousand health information and medication kits were distributed to diabetic patients to help encourage an active role in their disease management.  “Patients were asked to bring this HEALTHeHISTORY kit, which included a tote bag and folder to store visit summaries and lab results, to each doctor visit and any trip to the hospital,” the report says.
Additionally, a preventative telemonitoring pilot was developed, involving home health and visiting nurse organizations to distribute blood pressure, blood glucose, and weight tracking devices to patients at home.  Patients reported a better understanding of their conditions and an overall improvement in their health.  “I see all of this as one big puzzle, and without all the pieces, it falls apart,” said Ken Wilson, a participant in the telehealth program.  “I have maintained better blood sugar control, blood pressure control, and weight loss since beginning on telemonitoring.”
“Building on WNY Beacon’s work, HEALTHeLINK has also launched communitywide electronic secure messaging, allowing providers to share clinical records and other health information to improve the coordination of care, even if they do not have an EHR system,” the report concludes. “In addition, a framework for quality improvement analysis has been created within HEALTHeLINK for the Western New York community. Moving forward, the successes of WNY Beacon will continue to serve as a guide for the creative and effective use of electronic clinical information, both locally and across the nation.”
  Tagged Coordination of CareHealth Information ExchangeHIE AnalyticsHospital ReadmissionsmHealth and Population HealthPatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


