Calls Increase for Better Medical Device Surveillance Systems

February 24, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 24, 2015 - In a new report advocating more robust medical device surveillance from the FDA, the Brookings Institution is adding to industry requests that healthcare analytics move past EHR data to better integrate patient safety and care quality information from the numerous devices in constant use in the hospital setting.  While the Food and Drug Administration has declined to regulate many of the lowest-risk medical devices coming to market, those that have a significant impact on patient safety must be better connected to the growing network of surveillance systems that allow monitoring, research, and appropriate recalls.
“Medical devices play a critical role in health care. Access to reliable and meaningful information about the safety, effectiveness, and quality of devices is essential to inform care and improve patient outcomes,” the report says. “Patients and clinicians need information about devices to inform their clinical decisions. Organizations responsible for paying for care want to ensure that the products they cover lead to optimal patient outcomes. Manufacturers want timely feedback on device performance to support patient safety and drive innovation.”
To accomplish these goals, a planning board convened by Brookings suggests that the FDA invest in the development of a National Medical Device Postmarket Surveillance System (MDS), which would become the hub for analyzing medical device data.  MDS would coordinate and build upon existing medical device surveillance systems from public health organizations, research centers, and other stakeholders, and should also be integrated into the FDA’s existing Sentinel Initiative, which has seen significant success as a patient safety monitoring program.
To support this mission, MDS should be responsible for coordinating medical device postmarket evidence activities to ensure that there is a harmonized national approach focused on improving evidence and reducing burden,” adds the report. “MDS should also build and facilitate access to a network of data partners that utilizes the emerging national health electronic information infrastructure to address medical device-specific questions.”
Dig Deeper
Machine Learning Can Flag Adverse Drug Events in Unstructured Data
VA to Get “Aggressive” with Hospital Quality Improvement Program
How Soon Will Healthcare Connect Machine Learning with Consumers?
The Brookings report adds to previous calls for a national medical device system issued last year by the Pew Charitable Trusts, Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, and Science Infrastructure Center at Weill Cornell Medical College. “FDA and other stakeholders currently rely on passive systems—such as reporting of adverse events—to provide data on the performance of devices,” the September 2014 report stated.
“When questions about an approved device arise, collection of the necessary data is hampered because few platforms exist to support investigation. Device registries, established as one of the four pillars of FDA’s plan to strengthen the national postmarket surveillance system, are an important tool to fill this gap.”
In order to develop a workable system that engages the maximum possible number of important stakeholders, Brookings suggests the FDA take a multi-phase approach rolled out over the next seven years.  The first two years would be dedicated to developing strategies, engagement, and pilot programs that would test the feasibility of the system and set the course for the second, more actionable phase.
In years three through seven, the FDA should promote participation from the healthcare industry by fostering the adoption of unique device identifiers (UDIs), as laid out in a separate FDA final rule in 2013.  UDIs will be a key component of ensuring that data collection and sharing within the medical device surveillance system would not pose an undue burden on participants.
During this time, the FDA should also implement strategies to protect patient privacy, ensure the security of shared data, and develop enough capabilities within the system to encourage stakeholders to see the value in participation.
“The Planning Board believes that improved medical device surveillance is a public health and national priority and that the most effective way to address this priority is through the broad public-private partnership described in the report,” the authors write, adding that the FDA is among many government bodies struggling to secure funding for new initiatives. “However, without some initial seed funding and active FDA engagement, it will be difficult to assure the purpose and sustain the momentum necessary for other stakeholders to fully engage in the development of MDS.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealthcare AnalyticsPatient Safety


