How Can Healthcare Ensure Its Big Data is Smart Enough?

November 08, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Healthcare organizations must be sure that they are collecting big data for the right reasons in the right ways.
November 08, 2014 - There’s nothing more frustrating than searching for something you’re sure you remember putting in a certain place before ripping a crowded room apart – only to discover that you never really had the object at all.  For healthcare, deriving actionable insights from big data analytics can be a lot like that irritating scenario.  Organizations are constantly hoarding petabytes of data, but they can’t access the right information when they need it.  Big data is about more than hoarding information for a rainy day.  It’s about organizing, storing, analyzing, and presenting that information in a way that produces useful answers at the point of care.
How can healthcare organizations make sure that they are collecting the right data in the right quantity for the right reason?
Collect smart data, not just big data
“Work smarter, not harder” may seem like a phrase that belongs on a trite motivational poster, but it is a good mantra for healthcare organizations building up a big data infrastructure.  Not all organizations have the luxury of ripping out existing health IT systems and designing an elegantly seamless warehouse from scratch, but that doesn’t mean you can’t be smart about the choices you have to make.  Choosing to rely on data standards such as HL7 will allow all pieces of a patchwork system to be harmoniously interoperable.  Investing early in clinical documentation improvement, EHR optimization, and health information governance strategies will prevent future complications from incompatible workflows, staff turnover, or other issues that can cause unwelcome variation in the system.
And make sure that you are really collecting all the data that you think you are, lest you end up scratching your head in that crowded room, looking for what doesn’t exist.  “What organizations are finding is that what they thought they were collecting isn’t what they were actually getting,” said Shane Pilcher, Vice President at Stoltenberg Consulting.  “Two to three years ago, when EHRs were really starting to be implemented, there was a big push to avoid controlling how clinicians entered their information.  You could create drop-down boxes with options in the box, but because we didn’t want to spoon feed them or put words in their mouth, the typical approach was to leave an option for free text as well.  If they didn’t like what they were seeing as options, they could write their own answer.”
READ MORE: The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
“You think of that as a great option, you build your system and start collecting the data – but when you go to look at what you’ve got, you have a lot of unstructured data that is almost unusable in its current form,” Pilcher continued. “I would think that the majority of hospitals are falling short of the data that they need right now.”
Unstructured data is a key strategic asset, not the enemy
But it does require a bit of extra work to make it usable.  Hospitals may be wondering what to do with all their free-text input when they have geared their data analytics systems towards a more structured way of looking at information, but tools that can process and analyze unstructured data are available, and are growing more accessible as machine learning and natural language processing become more sophisticated realities.
“I think we’re reaching a point of sophistication in the technology where we’re going to be doing a lot more with unstructured data storage or data repositories,” Wes Wright, Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer at Seattle Children’s Hospital, said.  “I think the advice is that while maintaining your current BI data warehouses, your eye should really be on the unstructured data mining potential that is coming into the market now.  You kind of have to throw the paradigm of the data model out the window, I think, within the next two to five years.”
“For a long time, the pendulum swung way over into the direction of structured data and structured data entry,” he added.  “And I think it’s swinging back to the unstructured. For example, you might have a clinical note that is unstructured within the note, but the header for that data is structured with HL7. There are certain things that have to go across in the package header, but there could also be a bunch of unstructured data in there, and that’s fine.”
READ MORE: Tech Giants Give Healthcare Artificial Intelligence Start-Ups a Boost
Look before you leap if you want to see big data success
It’s tempting for any organization to resort to creating workarounds that accomplish short term goals without much thought about how they will function in the future.  But a lack of overall strategic planning and information governance will lead to confusion, mistakes, time-consuming workflows, and puzzling shortcuts that end up obscuring the ultimate goal instead of leading towards it.  Big data is big, and it’s messy enough as it is without trying to put out a hundred different fires without a clear plan.
We are at the very beginning of the big data era, which means that healthcare organizations have the opportunity to lay the groundwork for years to come.  Don’t sacrifice quality for speed, especially since clinical analytics is intended to improve the way organizations deliver safe, effective, cost efficient care.
Healthcare providers may wish to take clues from industries that are a few steps ahead in the process of harnessing big data in order to ensure that they are building their infrastructure in a way that makes sense.  After all, “all data is fundamentally the same at its core,” asserts Steven Escaravage, Principal in Booz Allen’s Strategic Innovation Group.  “Data sets are observations that occur over time.  It’s data that describes the utilization of some type of resource.  It’s some transaction that takes place between a citizen, a customer, a patient, and some system that’s trying to provide benefits to those people.”
“As we break down the barriers between different domains and start reducing the problem to the data, and the methods and the techniques that they want to apply, in many cases we’ve solved that problem not once or twice but many, many times.  So we’re already armed with a space of a solid understanding of what we need to do and the opportunities and the pitfalls.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataBig Data Analytics


