Washington lawmakers want hospital price transparency

February 07, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 07, 2014 - In an effort to level the playing field for patients who may not understand how wildly the price of a service can vary from provider to provider, Washington State lawmakers have introduced a bill to create a publicly available hospital price database.  The information would let patients choose the least expensive facilities for elective procedures if they wished to, says Governor Jay Inslee, and also provide data on the quality of the organizations providing the services.
“We made a decision with the Affordable Care Act to use competition to control costs,” said Bob Crittenden, Gov. Inslee’s senior health policy adviser. “Competition requires a number of things. You need enough information to make decisions, and we don’t have that right now.”
Eleven states currently require pricing transparency, but two of the biggest insurers in Washington are opposing the public airing of reimbursement rates that have been privately negotiated with each hospital.  An additional proposal that would lay bare the allowed rates of payers faced similar resistance, with the insurance companies arguing that making the proprietary data public would damage competition in the market.  “We simply do not believe that [the All-Payer Claims Database] has any history of demonstrating any meaningful cost or quality improvement,” said Len Sorrin, a representative of Premera Blue Cross at a hearing discussing the proposal.
The payers’ concerns may be justified, says an unrelated study published in Health Affairs.  Pricier hospitals don’t necessarily provide higher quality care, says author Chapin White, but the expense may be justified for patients who have complex needs requiring specialized attention.  Smaller facilities may not have the market share to negotiate big price tags from insurance companies, but that doesn’t mean they provide inadequate care.
Dig Deeper
EHRs, Clinical Decision Support Top 2017 Patient Safety Hazard List
HHS: Patient Safety Efforts Save 125K Lives, $28B in Spending
Vendors Push Big Data Analytics, but Hospitals Focus on Safety, Security
Insurers are caught between not wanting to spend too much money on an individual care episode and balancing the immediate need with long-term costs associated with not getting good preventative care.  The ongoing re-negotiation of reimbursements involved in shifting to pay-for-performance also complicates the pricing landscape, as does a general upward trend in the out-of-pocket costs for patients with high deductible plans.
“There’s a remarkable amount of change going on,” said Doug Leonard, president of the Indiana Hospital Association. “Even though hospitals may not have had to feel the pressure on their prices — even as close as two years ago — there’s no question that they are now.”
That pressure is coming from the payers as well as the patients.  As the industry moves towards accountable care and payments based on outcomes, implementing a system designed to create openness around an outdated way of paying for care may not be the best use of public dollars.  Quality and price will become more clearly aligned in a pay-for-performance world, and may make the process of choosing a facility much easier for patients with an eye towards costs.
Tagged Healthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare QualityHospital QualityPatient CarePatient Safety


