CMS Support Program Turns Safety Net Providers into Medical Homes

June 26, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 26, 2017 - Federally qualified healthcare centers (FQHCs) that received technical and financial assistance from a CMS demonstration program were significantly more likely to become high-level patient-centered medical homes (PCMHs) than peers who did not enroll in the program.
According to a new study from RAND Corporation published in the New England Journal of Medicine this month, 70 percent of FQHCs participating in the 3-year Federally Qualified Health Center Advanced Primary Care Practice Demonstration initiative achieved Level 3 PCMH recognition from the NCQA. 
In contrast, just 11 percent of equivalent safety net providers not participating in the program were able to claim the same accolades.
Dig Deeper
NCQA: Patient-Centered Medical Home No Longer “Unduly Onerous”
Patient-Centered Medical Home May Improve Safety Net Care
Patient-Centered Medical Home Is a “Pragmatic” Shift in Care
“Federally qualified health centers, a critical source of primary care for vulnerable populations, are increasingly adopting medical-home models,” explained the authors.
“Although many federally qualified health centers have historically provided patient-centered, team-based care, the implementation of other medical-home components, such as expanding access to care after hours and developing data analytics capabilities, may present substantial challenges in health centers that have limited financial resources or high staff turnover.”
The CMS support program aimed to explore whether practice transformation guidance and a modest care management supplement for Medicare beneficiaries could reduce the strain on FQHCs seeking to become recognized medical homes. 
Between November 2011 and November 2014, more than 500 sites received an extra $6 per Medicare beneficiaries each month to support care management activities.  They also engaged with experts in change management, received semi-annual feedback on their progress towards their PCMH designations, and reviewed quarterly reports on service utilization, patient satisfaction, and quality of care.
While more sites participating in the demo achieved Level 3 recognition than those not involved in the project, there were few significant differences in utilization, spending, and outcomes between the two groups, RAND found after completing a post-program study of patients and standard provider performance metrics.
Emergency department visits and inpatient admissions actually increased among demonstration sites, and Medicare expenditures did not notably decrease in either group.  Primary care utilization rates also increased.
“Primary care medical practices are rapidly adopting the patient-centered medical home model of care and one result may be that under-served patients use more services once it becomes easier to access care,” pointed out Justin Timbie, lead author of the study and a senior health policy researcher at RAND, a nonprofit research organization.
“There also is evidence that improvements in primary care may lead to reductions in specialty care and cost over a longer period than we examined in this study.”
Beneficiaries receiving care at demo sites did report being able to receive appointments more quickly than before, and reported higher satisfaction with getting answers to their medical questions.
The differences in performance may have been relatively flat – but due to a positive reason, noted the study’s authors.
“We found that many of the health centers in our comparison group also made changes to adopt a medical home model, which may have limited the differences we saw among those who participated in the federal demonstration project,” said the study’s senior author Dr. Katherine Kahn, a professor at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA and Distinguished Chair in Health Care Delivery Measurement and Evaluation at RAND.
Although the majority of demonstration sites did achieve their broad objective of becoming recognized medical homes by the end of the three-year program, the initiative did not produce the marked improvements in patient care and outcomes that the authors originally expected.  Most demonstration sites required the entire length of the program to meet their Level 3 goals without reducing expenditures.
The researchers found that the care management payments and technical assistance improved provider satisfaction somewhat, but participants did not believe that the $6 per beneficiary was sufficient to cover all of the financial, infrastructure, and workflow stresses involved in medical home transformation. 
Medicare beneficiaries comprised just 12 percent of the patient populations among demonstration sites, the study added.  Since the PCMH transformation process applies to all care management process and does not segment improvements to patient care based on insurance, providers were not receiving compensation for the vast majority of their efforts.
“Any future tests of medical-home interventions in federally qualified health centers should build on these results by considering alternative designs, with attention to the magnitude of financial assistance and the duration of the evaluation, to better understand how to facilitate practice transformation and ensure that these changes translate into improved outcomes for vulnerable Medicare beneficiaries,” the study concluded.
Tagged Care QualityMedicare SpendingPatient Centered Medical HomePopulation Health ManagementSafety Net Patients


