Congress wants end-of-life planning reimbursed by CMS

September 25, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 25, 2014 - End-of-life planning for elderly or terminally ill patients should be adequately reimbursed by Medicare and Medicaid, says a Congressional letter to CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner, in order to encourage documented decision making for difficult discussions about treatment preferences.  Even though up to half of senior citizens experience a significant need for assistance with making care decisions when hospitalized, the lack of financial reimbursement for time spent on care planning means that physicians skip the process in favor of more lucrative tasks.
“Patients who wish to make clear their goals, values, and wishes through discussions with their trusted providers should have the opportunity to do so,” writes Earl Blumenauer (D-OR) in the letter signed by 33 other members of Congress. “In order to have these conversations, providers must have the adequate time, space, and reimbursement to conduct the complex and time-consuming discussions necessary to learn about the goals and values held by their patients and plan appropriately for their care. “
“Every organization that has seriously considered this issue, from the American Medical Association to the Institutes of Medicine, knows we have to start respecting people’s choices about how they face the end of life,” Blumenauer added. “Making this simple change will have a profound effect on the way patients and their families spend their final days, and everyone deserves that dignity.”
The AMA recently created dedicated CPT codes to capture end-of-life planning conversations, and the letter urges CMS to include the codes in the Medicare Physician Payment Schedule for 2015. “We find it troubling that Medicare reimburses almost every medical procedure, yet places no value on the time doctors take to provide thoughtful counsel to prepare patients and families for the delicate, complex, and emotionally demanding decisions surrounding the end of life,” Blumenauer writes.
Dig Deeper
Big Data Shows Gender-Based Medical Error, Patient Safety Patterns
How Patient Safety Organizations Encourage Data Collection, Quality Care
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
While the documentation of advanced care directives for 50% of patients 65 or older is a menu item in Stage 1 of meaningful use, only 80% of hospitals even had the capability to do so in 2012, according to ONC data.  With the increasing adoption of patient portals and personal health records, however, patients may be able to record their own wishes without a formalized provider discussion.
Tagged Hospital QualityMedicarePatient CareQuality Of Care


