Depression screenings for diabetics improve self-management

August 13, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 13, 2014 - Diabetic patients who were appropriately screened for behavioral health disorders such as depression achieved better blood glucose control and improved self-management of their chronic disease, according to a study conducted in North Carolina.  The study, presented at a meeting of the American Academy of Diabetes Educators, found that providing support for depressed patients resulted in a 1% drop in hemoglobin A1C levels and cut depression assessment scores in half.
“We realized that there really were no resources for patients who had underlying depression or other mental health issues,” said Melissa Herman, a registered dietitian and certified diabetes educator at FirstHealth of Carolinas.  “Folks were not asking or screening these individuals about depression, and we really felt like the depression interfered with their ability to take care of their diabetes, because the lack of jobs, lack of access to care, medication, and social issues trumped the diabetes care.”
Nearly two-thirds of FirstHealth patients live below the poverty line, and diabetes is almost twice as prevalent in the three rural counties studied in the pilot than in the rest of the state.  An unrelated study conducted in California recently found that diabetes patients living in low-income areas were twice as likely to experience an amputation due to poor education about the disease, a lack of access to primary care, and a dearth of community resources that encourage adequate self-management.
At FirstHealth, providers used their EHRs to ask a few questions about the patient’s mental health status, and referred patients to a social worker for help when necessary.  Of the 222 patients referred to social workers, 181 kept their appointments and saw the professional an average of three times over a three month period.  They were further assessed for depression with the PHQ-9 questionnaire by the social work coaches.
Dig Deeper
CMS: Patient-Centered Care Strategies Can Combat Opioid Abuse
CMS Seeks Providers for Socioeconomic Population Health Program
Cherokees Sue McKesson, CVS, Wal-Mart for Lax Opioid Monitoring
Herman found that 60 percent of patients saw a PHQ-9 improvement of around 50 percent.  The social workers also identified 11 patients at risk of self-harm, who were then referred to more comprehensive psychological services. The results have been “phenomenal,” Herman said, adding that the program has been continued past the initial grant period due to its great success.  “It’s not time intensive, it’s just a matter of telling people that it’s okay to vent, and then give them some coping skills,” she said.
FirstHealth’s diabetes management program recently won recognition from the American Hospital Association (AHA) for its community-based approach to population health management.  Diabetes workers conducted screenings at community locations such as banks and senior centers, developed a group education program for patients, and used mHealth to encourage self-management.  Between 2007 and 2011, the FirstReach program cut diabetic mortality rates in one county from 40.8% to 22.8% even as the incidence rate of the chronic disease rose by four percent.
“FirstReach continues today with the addition of diabetes education telehealth services across the region, both for one-on-one consultations and group classes and through the addition of depression screening for diabetic patients and a behavioral coaching approach,” said Herman. “Future initiatives will work to address pre-diabetes, in hopes of influencing the diabetes prevalence numbers.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


