WHO: Battle against cancer requires better preventative care

February 04, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 04, 2014 - Worldwide cancer rates are predicted to rise 57% over the next two decades, says the 2014 World Cancer Report from the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and the World Health Organization (WHO), unless providers can improve early detection and early treatment strategies.  While research and drug development has brought hope to millions, cancer’s staggering economic and human toll must be addressed through preventative care for enormous number of patients with genetic or lifestyle factors that predispose them to higher risk.
“Despite exciting advances, this report shows that we cannot treat our way out of the cancer problem,” states Dr Christopher Wild, Director of IARC and co-editor of the report. “More commitment to prevention and early detection is desperately needed in order to complement improved treatments and address the alarming rise in cancer burden globally.  The rise of cancer worldwide is a major obstacle to human development and well being. These new figures and projections send a strong signal that immediate action is needed to confront this human disaster, which touches every community worldwide, without exception.”
In 2010, the worldwide economic burden of cancer was estimated at approximately $1.16 trillion, with more than 60% of the world’s cases and 70% of its cancer deaths occurring in Africa, Asia, and South America.  About half of these cancer cases could be avoided if current medical knowledge was applied consistently, Wild says.
Population health management techniques, including routine screenings for colorectal, cervical, and breast cancer, could help turn the tide against the alarming increase in late diagnoses and deaths.  There were 14 million new cases of cancer in 2012 alone. Lung cancer, liver cancer, and stomach cancer were the most deadly forms of the disease.
Dig Deeper
CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Experts predict the number of new diagnoses will rise to 22 million annually without significant investment from lawmakers and providers.   A commitment to programs that reduce risk factors like obesity and alcohol abuse can be put in place locally, but the report also advocates laws that restrict advertising and increase taxes on cigarettes in order to dissuade consumption.
“Governments must show political commitment to progressively step up the implementation of high-quality screening and early detection programs, which are an investment rather than a cost,” says Dr Bernard W. Stewart, who also co-edited the report.
“Adequate legislation can encourage healthier behavior, as well as having its recognized role in protecting people from workplace hazards and environmental pollutants,” Stewart added.  “In low- and middle-income countries, it is critical that governments commit to enforcing regulatory measures to protect their populations and implement cancer prevention plans.”
Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementPatient CarePopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


