Only 29% of Sinusitis Visits Adhere to Evidence-Based Care

August 17, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 17, 2015 - Urgent care, primary care, and emergency department clinicians rarely adhere to evidence-based care guidelines for the treatment of common sinusitis, finds a new study published last month in the American Journal of Managed Care. 
Just 29 percent of adult acute sinusitis encounters followed accepted clinical guidelines for the prescription of antibiotics and the ordering of CT scans, says the Kaiser Permanente study, with emergency department visits significantly more likely to result in expensive imaging tests.
Sinusitis strikes approximately 31 million patients every year, according to the American Academy of Family Physicians, incurring around $3 billion in costs due to tests and procedures, outpatient and emergency department visits, and medication.  It is among the top five conditions for which antibiotics are prescribed, but national clinical guidelines dictate that antibiotics should only be tried if the condition lasts more than seven days.
Providers may be contributing to poor antibiotic stewardship by prescribing the medication for patients inappropriately, suggest the researchers, resulting in low-value care for the services provided.  Antibiotics were prescribed in 89.2 percent of the 152,774 EHR encounters surveyed by the researchers.  Approximately 50 percent of these encounters were with patients who had been experiencing symptoms for less than seven days. 
Despite the frequency with which providers encounter acute sinusitis, their treatment and prescription habits have not been closely monitored.  “A clear understanding of current practices requires awareness of how acute sinusitis is treated in different acute care settings,” say the researchers, who hail from Kaiser Permanente’s large, integrated Southern California system. “There is a need to better understand and coordinate acute care services in order to accomplish the triple aim of improving the patient care experience and improving population health, while reducing the per capita cost of healthcare.”
READ MORE: Regional Variation Points Out Value of Antibiotic Stewardship
“Better documentation of variation in practices across care settings will help to identify best practices and target areas for improvement. Additionally, a better understanding of guideline adherence within different settings will have important ramifications for future policies to efficiently coordinate and improve acute care services.”
The study found that more than three-quarters of sinusitis encounters took place in a primary care setting, while 22 percent occurred in an urgent care facility and only one percent in the emergency department.  Primary care providers ordered fewer CT scans and antibiotics than their urgent care counterparts, but favored antibiotics more than emergency room physicians. 
Urgent care providers are most likely to prescribe antibiotics and order CT imaging, even though the use of a CT scan is indicated only when complications from severe bacterial sinusitis or an alternative diagnosis are suspected.  Urgent care patients are twice as likely as primary care patients to receive both an antibiotic and a CT scan.  Emergency department patients are sixty times as likely to receive a CT scan as primary care patients, and fifty times as likely to receive both services.
The study notes that patients who seek care in the emergency department may have different characteristics than those choosing urgent or primary care, which may account for the significant differences in interventions.  Emergency department patients may present with much more severe symptoms, warranting advanced testing – a higher proportion of ED patients presented with fevers than those choosing primary or urgent care – and also tended to be less wealthy and hold lower levels of education.
Even though a very small proportion of patients chose the emergency department for care, they are significantly less likely than urgent care or primary care patients to fill their prescriptions for antibiotics.  While 89 percent of patients overall filled their prescriptions, the statistic includes just 72.8 percent of emergency department visitors.  ED patients were 40 percent less likely than primary care or urgent care patients to follow through with their regimens.
READ MORE: CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
The study concludes by noting that providers may benefit from refreshed education about antibiotic stewardship and prescription guidelines.  “The age-old problem of inappropriate antibiotic prescribing may be partly due to the difficulty in differentiating bacterial infections from more common viral illnesses. To help clinicians identify patients who are likely to benefit from antibiotics for acute sinusitis, the most pragmatic and evidence-based approach is to focus on the patient’s length of symptoms.”
“Since more harm than benefit is expected from antibiotics for patients who have had symptoms for less than 14 days, this can help clinician leaders and administrators to develop an evidence-based target for a system-level standard,” the researchers add. “Because some patients do benefit from antibiotics, while the majority do not, our findings can help clinical leaders and administrators to develop an evidence-based target for the proportion of acute sinusitis encounters that are likely to benefit from antibiotics.”
Tagged Hospital QualityMedical ResearchPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


