Kaiser Permanente safety net reduces risk of adverse events

January 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 17, 2014 - As one of the biggest health networks in the nation with more than 3.6 million members in the Southern California Permanente Medical Groups (SCPMG) system, Kaiser Permanente has invested heavily in a complex system of health IT for its patients.  From health information exchange to its in-house EHR, patients are documented during every contact with their providers.  However, even with the best technology, sometimes things fall through the cracks.  For patients with multiple conditions or a handful of medications, a gap in the problem list or pharmacy record can have fatal results.  To combat potential drug safety errors, Kaiser has developed a safety net system to catch problems and address patients at significant risk of outpatient medication mistakes before they experience complications.
“The Outpatient Medication Safety Net Program has been very successful in identifying patients at high risk for adverse medication-related events and intervening before harm. Each year the centralized program has been able to add more initiatives using technology and improved efficiencies, without adding additional costs,” says a study on the system published in Pharmacy Practice News.  The interdisciplinary care team in charge of the safety net procedures have ordered nearly 400,000 overdue lab tests and changed the drug regimens of 1000 elderly patients to reduce the risk of fractures and falls from medications that may cause dizziness or other side effects.
The care team includes a pharmacist, nurse consultant, and two licensed vocational nurse (LVN) care coordinators that tackle three areas of potential oversights: delayed treatments, medication errors, and mismanaged multi-drug prescriptions in elderly patients.  Over the past four years, dividing the patient population into cohorts of less than 5000 has ensured that the maximum number of patients receive personalized attention.
Dig Deeper
Unique Device Identifiers in Claims Could Aid Healthcare Analytics
How Do Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning Differ in Healthcare?
FDA Unveils Patient Safety Analytics Tool for Medical Research
“The daily role of the pharmacist is to develop and lead the clinical interventions of each initiative. LVNs assist the pharmacist with non-clinical interventions involving pending labs, triaging, contacting patients, sending letters, and booking appointments,” the study explains. “For the larger initiatives, such as the one that seeks to address overdue annual labs for diuretics and anticonvulsants, where the population is greater than 100,000 affected patients, Kaiser Permanente has the ability to leverage technology to batch-order labs and letters for patients.”
The safety net program has seen “promising results,” the study says.  “More than 370,000 overdue labs, for example, have been ordered in patients taking diuretics or anticonvulsants. Of those lab results, 16% were abnormal and alerted clinicians to the need for intervention. Eight hundred elderly patients taking anticholinergic medications were changed to safer medications to decrease fall and fracture risk. Patients with dementia taking anticholinergic medications were also identified and more than 750 medications were discontinued.”
The combination of human attention to potential problems and the use of technology to supplement care teams allow Kaiser to identify possible holes in its patient safety monitoring and adjust services as needed.  “If every healthcare organization could take a systemic approach to medication management,” the study concludes, “preventable ADEs and unnecessary visits to the hospital or provider would be reduced and overall patient outcomes would improve significantly.”
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataClinical AnalyticsClinical InformaticsPatient Safety


