Atul Gawande to Lead Amazon, Berkshire, JPMorgan Healthcare Company

June 20, 2018

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 20, 2018 - Brigham and Women’s surgeon Dr. Atul Gawande will be leading Amazon’s most significant leap into the healthcare industry yet by becoming CEO of the partnership between the e-commerce giant, JPMorgan Chase, and Berkshire Hathaway.
“I’m thrilled to be named CEO of this healthcare initiative,” said Gawande. “I have devoted my public health career to building scalable solutions for better healthcare delivery that are saving lives, reducing suffering, and eliminating wasteful spending both in the US and across the world.”
“Now I have the backing of these remarkable organizations to pursue this mission with even greater impact for more than a million people, and in doing so incubate better models of care for all. This work will take time but must be done. The system is broken, and better is possible.”
Dig Deeper
Can Health IT Platforms Support Success as Artificial Intelligence Looms?
Amazon is Exploring the Role of Alexa in Chronic Disease Care
Costs Fell by 11% When Payer Addressed Social Determinants of Health
Atul, a writer and well-known face on the healthcare innovation circuit, will head the unnamed entity as it settles into a home in Boston. 
The company plans to tackle unspecified problems that affect employees and their interactions with the healthcare system, but is likely to focus on applying consumer-driven strategies to reducing costs, improving engagement, and creating better long-term outcomes.
“As employers and as leaders, addressing healthcare is one of the most important things we can do for our employees and their families, as well as for the communities where we all work and live,” said Jamie Dimon, Chairman and CEO of JPMorgan Chase.
“Together, we have the talent and resources to make things better, and it is our responsibility to do so. We’re so grateful for the countless statements of support and offers to help and participate, and we’re so fortunate to have attracted such an extraordinary leader and innovator as Atul,”
The venture has been watched with great interest by an industry bracing for massive disruption from non-traditional players.  Despite being shrouded in mystery, with few details available, the January 2018 announcement of the new partnership has sparked innumerable speculations about Amazon’s entry into the ecosystem.
With its unparalleled consumer reach, a comprehensive distribution platform, and a suite of complementary technologies like Alexa to establish patient relationships within the home, Amazon is uniquely positioned to become a major force in an increasingly data-driven healthcare economy.
“We said at the outset that the degree of difficulty is high and success is going to require an expert’s knowledge, a beginner’s mind, and a long-term orientation,” said Jeff Bezos, founder and CEO of Amazon. “Atul embodies all three, and we’re starting strong as we move forward in this challenging and worthwhile endeavor.”
Gawande is the founding executive director of Ariadne Labs, a joint innovation venture between Brigham and Women’s Hospital and the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.
“Talent and dedication were manifest among the many professionals we interviewed. All felt that better care can be delivered and that rising costs can be checked. Jamie, Jeff and I are confident that we have found in Atul the leader who will get this important job done,” said Berkshire Hathaway Chairman and CEO, Warren Buffett.
Gawande’s new position will allow him to lead “an independent entity that is free from profit-making incentives and constraints,” according to the press release, raising even more questions about how three powerhouse companies primarily known for being profit-makers will structure and scale an initiative designed to alter the economics of healthcare.
The new entity will need to start by defining and sharing its tangible goals with the rest of the industry – and it would likely benefit from deciding on a name.  Competitors, providers, and patients will have a great deal to keep their eyes on as details continue to unfold.
Tagged AmazonConsumerism in healthcareHealthcare CostsHealthcare PayersHealthcare Spending


