Study: Thyroid cancer is over-diagnosed and over-treated

February 21, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 21, 2014 - While advanced diagnosis tools can help spot dangerous cancers before they spread in order to save lives and reduce the costs and pain associated with latter-stage treatments, sometimes they can be too much of a good thing.  Thyroid cancer diagnosis rates have tripled since 1975, according to a study published in JAMA Otolaryngology this week, yet mortality rates have stayed the same, indicating an overabundance of treatments for cancers that have little potential to do much harm.
In 1975, thyroid cancer struck 4.9 of every 100,000 individuals.  Relatively easy to treat through radiation or thyroid removal, with only .5 deaths for every 100,000 people, the incidence of papillary thyroid cancer nonetheless increased to 14.3 per 100,000 by 2009, with the mortality rate remaining low and stable.  The gland is particularly troublesome for women, who are nearly four times more likely to be diagnosed with thyroid cancer.
The primary treatment for those diagnosed with a tumor is complete thyroidectomy, which occurs in 85% of cases.  The invasive procedure is followed by a lifetime of thyroid replacement hormones.  But the study calls into question the necessity for such drastic measures for tumors that are too small to cause harm and unlikely to grow.
“There is an ongoing epidemic of thyroid cancer in the United States. The epidemiology of the increased incidence, however, suggests that it is not an epidemic of disease but rather an epidemic of diagnosis,” said Dr. Gilbert Welch, study co-author and Professor of Medicine at the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice. "Our old strategy of looking as hard as possible to find cancer has some real side effects.”
Dig Deeper
Will Clinical Decision Support, Health IT Cut Diagnostic Errors?
Big Data Analytics, Machine Learning Support 2017 Most Wired Hospitals
Sepsis “Sniffer” Brings Predictive Analytics to Patient Safety
Rethinking the way physicians approach thyroid cancer will be “challenging,” Welch says, but could ultimately reduce the costs of unnecessary tests while cutting the risks of unwarranted surgical procedures.  Some patients may benefit instead from careful monitoring instead of surgery, and physicians may want to opt for a discussion with their patients about the best way to proceed rather than jumping into thyroidectomy immediately.
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical Decision SupportHospital QualityPatient CarePatient SafetyQuality Of Care


