What can Google searches reveal about health disparities?

August 22, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 22, 2014 - Google may track patterns in search engine use primarily to target advertising to users, but healthcare providers may be able to glean some important insights from the company’s big data, as well.  The New York Times reports that correlating search data with information about the socioeconomic status of communities nationwide reveals a stark difference in what information is important to consumers.  For residents of economically challenged areas, the most popular keywords are centered around diabetes, blood pressure control, dieting information, and requests for free medications and other healthcare help.
The impact of socioeconomic status on health and wellness is well-documented, with several new studies highlighting the role of non-medical factors on the health of populations.  Patients who typically rely on safety net services are twice as likely to have poor control of their diabetes and require amputations, one study found, while another project revealed that patients living in low-income communities were 7% more likely to experience a hospital readmission for a cardiac issue than patients from wealthier areas.
Researchers have been turning to internet data sources and social media outlets like Facebook, Twitter, and Google as ways to unlock clues about what is really concerning patients outside of the clinic.  While the data provided by these free-text, informal services can be extremely difficult to work with, Twitter has shown promise as a way to track adverse drug events or patients at higher risk for acquiring HIV.
“We are very interested in pushing the boundaries of the science of social media and to see this as an opportunity to better understand the patient voice, in this case, how people share information about sleep problems and their day-to-day impact on quality of life,” said Sachin Jain, MD, MBA, chief medical information and innovation officer at Merck, commenting on a project that uses Facebook and Twitter to gather information on sleep disorders.
Dig Deeper
All of Us Precision Medicine Network Expands with $13.8M in Grants
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
Machine Learning Underpins Predictive Analytics for Hypertension
That patient voice is often loudest when professionals aren’t listening.  When the New York Times pinned common search results against county-level demographic data, which sorted living conditions into “easy” and “hard” based on factors like unemployment rates, education, disability rates, and income levels, they found that users in the “hard” areas were significantly more likely to search for health-related information.
Terms like “free diabetic,” “low carb diet,” “low calorie diet,” and “ways to lower blood pressure” were among the top searches performed by patients in the hard-to-live areas, while users in wealthier areas looked for things like digital cameras, iPad applications, bands, and movie titles.  Thirty-five percent of the top twenty searches in harder-to-live areas were related to ways users could improve their health or access healthcare.  Forty-five percent popular searches in richer areas were related to digital cameras.  The only health-related term on the list was “jogger.”
For population health management professionals, the search data reinforces what they already know about health disparities in the United States.  Limited access to healthcare providers, community resources like grocery stores that sell nutritionally balanced options, and lower levels of education and health literacy can combine to form a trap that keeps patients from making good choices for their own wellbeing.  Focusing educational resources, outreach, and low-cost or free clinic access on socioeconomically challenged areas could make a significant impact for patients who may feel like they have nowhere to turn but the unregulated no-man’s land of internet search results.
Tagged Big DataPatient DataPopulation Health Management


