Roche Buys Flatiron Cancer Analytics, EHR Tools for $1.9B

February 16, 2018

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 16, 2018 - Swiss pharmaceutical giant Roche will purchase Flatiron Health’s cancer analytics assets for $1.9 billion in an effort to enhance the drug development process and further the progress of precision medicine.
Flatiron Health, backed by Google parent company Alphabet Inc., also offers an electronic health record (EHR) tailored to the needs of oncologists while focusing on curating and developing real-world evidence for cancer research and the application of personalized therapies.
Roche already owned more than 12 percent of the company, but will acquire all shares in the massive new purchase.
Dig Deeper
Tech, Life Sciences Companies Eye Big Data, Internet of Things
83% of Life Science Execs Expect Healthcare Blockchain in 5 Years
Allscripts Buys Practice Fusion to Bulk Up on Big Data, EHR, Life Sciences
“This is an important step in our personalized healthcare strategy for Roche, as we believe that regulatory-grade real-world evidence is a key ingredient to accelerate the development of, and access to, new cancer treatments,” said Roche Pharmaceuticals CEO Daniel O’Day.
“As a leading technology company in oncology, Flatiron Health is best positioned to provide the technology and data analytics infrastructure needed not only for Roche, but for oncology research and development efforts across the entire industry. A key principle of this is to preserve Flatiron’s autonomy and their ability to continue providing their services to all existing and future partners.”
Flatiron will continue its current business model and trajectory after the deal is signed, Roche says.
“Roche has been a tremendous partner to us over the past two years and shares our vision for building a learning healthcare platform in oncology ultimately designed to improve the lives of cancer patients,” said Nat Turner, Flatiron Health Co-Founder and CEO.
“This important milestone will allow us to increase our investments in our provider-facing technology and services platform, as well as our evidence-generation platform, which will remain available to the entire healthcare industry.”
The deal comes at a time when life science and pharmaceutical companies are hoping to take the lead in the growing precision medicine market. 
In order to tailor therapies to individual patients based on genomic, lifestyle, or clinical factors, pharmaceutical developers much have access to analytics infrastructure and large-scale data assets to help them generate actionable insights.
Data and insights on the effectiveness and usage patterns of certain prescriptions may also help pharma companies succeed with innovative value-based pharmaceutical contracts, which payers are just starting to employ as a way to tamp down the nation’s skyrocketing prescription drug costs.
Flatiron Health’s analytics prowess, alongside its direct connection to oncologists through its EHR product, will likely put Roche in a good position to take on both these trends.
Roche and Flatiron expect the transaction to close in the first half of 2018, subject to customary closing conditions.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsPersonalized MedicinePrecision Medicine


