Peterson Center Initiative Transforms Delivery of Primary Care

September 26, 2016

By Nathan Boroyan
September 26, 2016 - A new initiative being rolled out in clinics in three states is looking to transform primary care services by implementing a high-performance, lower-cost model that prioritizes patient engagement and population health management.
The initiative is a product of the Peterson Center on Healthcare, a nonprofit organization focused on finding and instituting care-quality and cost-cutting solutions. Together with a group of national primary care experts, the Peterson Center has already started implementing operational and management changes at clinics in New York, Missouri and Minnesota.
Specific sites include Mount Sinai Doctors Faculty Practice (Harlem, NY), Internal Medicine of St. Luke's (Chesterfield, MO) and Essentia Health-Moorhead Clinic (Moorhead, MN).
The new primary care model is based on Peterson Center-funded research by Stanford University's Clinical Excellence Research Center. The multi-year project identified primary care practices that delivered the most valuable care in the US, based on an analysis of commercial insurance data.
Dig Deeper
Partnership Offers Chronic Disease Management at Pharmacies
CMS Seeks Providers for Comprehensive Primary Care Initiative
200+ Healthcare Orgs Share Vision for Primary Care Transformation
“For most Americans, primary care is their entry point into the healthcare system and it is therefore a critical area to improve the quality of care and reduce costs,” said Jeffrey Selberg, executive director of the Peterson Center on Healthcare. “If we can replicate the model efficiently and spread its adoption, the ability to achieve better outcomes and lower costs could be enormous.”
Stanford researchers selected primary care practices based on their ability to deliver higher quality care at lower costs.
In an attempt to replicate the high-performance model, the Peterson Center brought together practice improvement, systems engineering, change management and patient engagement experts. The model has since been developed into 22 different units designed to meet the goals and needs of each practice team.
Practice sites have already started implementing some aspects of the model over the past several weeks, and early results have been positive.
"The team surfaced its own goals and learned how to apply improvement methodologies to improve how they work," said Niyum Gandhi, Mount Sinai Health System's chief population health officer. "We are already seeing benefits, including higher quality outcomes, more time spent between clinicians and patients, and more streamlined administration."
Using examples from the practice sites, the Peterson Center is currently working to develop a series of tools and processes to help facilitate large-scale transformation across more primary care facilities.
“One of the goals of this project is to design a method that can be both specific and adaptable to the myriad of practice environments in U.S. healthcare,” said Peter Jacobson, senior vice president of primary and integrated facilities for Essentia Health-West. “Given that many others also aspire to provide better care to patients, bring joy back into their work and thrive in an evolving environment, we hope other practices will benefit from some of the solutions we generate in our own transformation.”
Tagged EHR and Patient EngagementHealthcare CostsPopulation Health ManagementPrimary Care Services


