Survey: Population health, analytics top priorities for providers

October 15, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 15, 2013 - Population health management is a top priority for nearly two-thirds of hospital executives, according to a new survey by HealthLeaders Media.  Sixty-one percent of hospitals have already identified a target patient population and are actively working towards improving the health of that community through care coordination strategies and population analytics.  While health systems still face a number of challenges, including tough financial decision-making, the concept of population health as a strategy for cost cutting and outcome improvement is clearly deeply rooted in the consciousness of healthcare as an industry.
Financial concerns are one of the biggest motivators of care reforms incorporating population health.  Nearly a third of the 315 respondents identified payer risk and cost sharing as the top financial motivator for introducing population health management.  Monetary interests were also significant when selecting a marketing plan to attract patients, and for hospitals to develop a better understanding of the total cost of care for a single patient across all facilities, including rehabilitation or follow-ups that may not be directly related to a hospital’s billings.
In order to improve care coordination, 49% of providers intend to hire patient navigators and care coordinators within the next year.  Forty-five percent plan to increase community outreach, and 40% will expand relationships with local clinics and walk-in centers to form a more complete picture of services provided to a patient in multiple facilities.
To further their ability to target educational programs and identify at-risk populations, providers will be turning to data analytics.  Sixty-six percent of respondents plan to make investments in analytics architecture, while 53% intend to add to their current capabilities.  The need for a deeper understanding of how analytics works was evident in the survey, with 56% acknowledging that they need better training in analytics and 44% seeking experts in population statistics.
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
Stress, Depression Negatively Impact Chronic Disease Management
Overall, 90% of participants intend to examine population health management as a way to improve overall patient health, whether they have started to do so or not.  Health systems are most often tracking patients by chronic condition, such as diabetes or heart disease, with 32% using a disease as an identifier.  Twenty percent are tracking patients by geographic location, while only 5% use a demographic characteristic, such as age or gender, as their primary flag for risk.  Wellness programs, health risk assessments, and population outreach were the most popular ways to engage a defined population in their own care.
The survey indicates a significant push towards integrating population health management into larger cost reduction and community engagement programs.  Tracking patients by condition and offering services to help improve the coordination of care are key tenants of healthcare reform, and are now being embraced by providers and payers alike.  As health systems achieve deeper analytics capabilities and begin to incorporate data into their decision making, patients are likely to see more targeted efforts to engage them in their own care of chronic conditions and general health.
  Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig Data AnalyticsEHR Patient DatamHealth and Population HealthPopulation Health Management


