Physician troubleshooting can add to patient analytics

September 30, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 30, 2013 - Healthcare is built around one simple idea: when someone is sick, someone needs to help them get better.  In an industry entirely focused on the patient, it’s no surprise that most healthcare information technology initiatives are geared towards scrutinizing the effectiveness of treatments, the prediction of future diseases and complications, and the quality of outcomes when a person leaves a hospital.  But healthcare analytics can do a whole lot more than look at patients, and it can do more than evaluate past performances of healthcare providers.  Identifying the weaknesses of individual physicians can do just as much to improve outcomes as prognostications about diabetes and TB.
The majority of hospitals produce some sort of reporting on physician performance, says Cathy Gorman-Klug, RN, MSN and director of quality service lines at Nuance, whether to close gaps in the billing cycle or make better decisions about which providers to keep on the payroll.  “Most facilities have report cards and dashboards that constantly reflect their performance and they’re monitoring these on a daily basis and sharing findings internally as well to drive improvements,” she says.  “By evaluating their processes, we’re able to help them address these issues up-front with the physician; issues that map back to quality measure reporting, and impact patient care and overall financial stability.”
It’s important to stress the connection between a physician’s daily workflow, his documentation habits, and even the way he asks questions of the patient and the end result of that patient’s care, says Dr. Joseph Kim in an opinion piece for SearchHealthIT.  Inefficient strategies or insufficient coordination of care can have real impacts on a patient’s health, and physicians can’t know what they can do to improve their work if they don’t have data on what’s not going well.
“To convince some of these physicians about their need to change their clinical behaviors, hospitals need to use more data analytics and present this in an ongoing fashion to their physicians,” Kim says. “They need to do this in a way that fits the culture of their medical staff. They need support and buy-in from the senior executive leadership and the medical staff leadership.  The data is there. Hospitals can identify those physicians.”
Big Data Integrity Needed to Use Genomics for Care Coordination
Can Point-of-Care Analytics Change the Healthcare Equation?
ONC releases EHR patient safety guides and tools
CVS to Offer Nationwide Home Delivery of Prescription Drugs
RNA Database to Aid Precision Medicine, Big Data Analytics
Population Health, Big Data Strategies Could Reduce $2B Waste
Early Screenings Boost Hepatitis C Chronic Disease Management
PA Big Data Analytics Projects Get $3M in Funding from UPMC
WEDI to Examine Data Analytics Backbone of Bundled Payments
Why do providers need to integrate analytics into the EHR?
Chronic Disease Management Costs 17 Times More than Average
Summit Medical, Humana Form Accountable Care Organization
EHRs Can’t Keep Up with Healthcare Analytics Abilities, Needs
ACOs Must Have Better Data for Population Health Management
IBM Watson Health, FDA Partner for EHR, IoT Blockchain Project
Single question flags patients at six-fold risk for suicide
3 Population Health Management Strategies to Cut Health Costs
Machine Learning Predicts Leukemia Remission with 100% Accuracy
ICU Admissions from Opioid Overdoses Increase 34% Since 2009
AARP Invests $60M in Dementia, Alzheimer’s Disease Research
QPID, Epic EHR Combine for Big Data Analytics at Partners Health
Health Information Exchange Data Scarce, Inaccurate, Incomplete
What is the New Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Program?
Antibiotic Stewardship, Patient Safety Plans Get Industry Support
EHR Usability Shortfalls May Up Pediatric Patient Safety Risks
Why the C-Suite is Critical for Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Gains in Longevity Slow Down for Most Chronic Diseases
How Does an ACO Differ from the Patient-Centered Medical Home?
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
KLAS Population Health Management Rankings Show Market Growth
92% of Providers to Use CMS Chronic Disease Management Program
Big Data Analytics Vendors and Products: Who’s Using What?
CMS Allows Orgs to Share and Sell Medicare, Private Claims Data
Rapid genetic testing for newborns helps pinpoint diagnoses
National nursing informatics award goes to MD professor
VA, IHS Receive DirectTrust Interoperability, Security Nod
Overlap of business, clinical intelligence lets analytics shine
Prescription Monitoring Program to Reduce Opioid Abuse in VA
Success of AI in Healthcare Relies on User Trust in Data, Algorithms
FDA Unveils Clinical Decision Support, Medical Device Guidance
Is There a True Definition of Population Health Management?
Clinical analytics market to reach $12.26 billion in 2019
CMS Public Health Data Repository Will Aid Quality Reporting
84% of Docs Say CMS Makes Clinical Quality Improvement Harder
Information Governance Must Protect PHI Outside the EHR
AMA Urges “Thoughtfully Designed” Artificial Intelligence for Healthcare
Providers, Politicians Focus on Population Health Management
Cerner Pilot Uses Population Health Analytics for Chronic Care
CPT, SNOMED-CT Codes Ally to Boost Healthcare Data Integrity
ONC Offers $80K for Tools to Improve EHR Reporting for Patient Safety
Accountable Care, Big Data Analytics Attract Vendor Attention
KLAS: Epic Systems, Cerner Lead EHR Vendors in Sepsis Analytics
Open EHR Notes Improve Medication Adherence, Engagement
How Patient Safety Organizations Encourage Data Collection, Quality Care
Privacy is the biggest concern in healthcare analytics, says poll
Mental Healthcare Big Data Warehouse Illuminates Care Trends
ONC: Public health reporting relies on EHR infrastructure
Population Health Scorecard Shows Geographical Divides in Quality
Social Media May Provide Big Data Insights into Drug Misuse
Developing Big Data Governance Strategies for Better EHR Use
How Federal Health IT Work Paves the Way for Big Data Analytics
Big Data, Value-Based Reimbursement Must Combine for Quality
Using big data governance to unlock healthcare archive value
Does State Regulation Help Boost Health IT, HIE, EHR Adoption?
Patient-Centered Medical Home Keeps Spending Low, Quality High
EHR Scribes Save Time, But Do They Produce Accurate Health Data?
Despite EHR Patient Portals, Providers Still Charge for PHI
Can $10B Solve Healthcare’s Big Data Analytics, Productivity Woes?
Geisinger Announces New National Precision Health Initiative
Why Sharing Cancer Big Data is Key to Personalized Medicine
Performance analytics for residents help quality benchmarking
Apple Explores Medical Data with Health Records API, Patents
UCLA Research Center to Focus on Healthcare Big Data Analytics
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
Women on oral birth control are 35% more likely to develop MS
LG Health, Aspire Launch $300M AI, IoT, Precision Medicine Fund
54% of Healthcare Pros Expect Widespread AI Adoption in 5 Years
Healthcare Artificial Intelligence, Cognitive Tools Bring Big Investments
DirectTrust: 44M Health Information Exchange Messages in 2015
Data Governance, Transparency Required for Patient-Centered Care
Healthcare analytics essentials: Hiring the data scientist
NJ invests in chronic disease, population health management
New Panel to Lead Cancer Moonshot Project for Precision Medicine
Breaking Down the ONC Health Data Interoperability Roadmap
Many psychiatrists, providers haven’t moved to DSM-5
Big Data Analytics Pin Colon Cancer Deaths on Care Variations
CMS Quality Strategy Aims for Population Health Management
IoT, EHRs to Push Healthcare API Market to $243M by 2024
Feb. 25 HIMSS14 vendor news, announcements, & demonstrations
Healthcare Big Data Analytics Keeps Small Hospitals Independent
Healthcare Big Data Analytics Market to Rise to $18.7B
Healtheway Rebrands to Promote Health Data Interoperability
CMS Releases Medicare Opioid Prescribing Maps, Data Resources
Partners Data Lake Offers Healthcare Analytics as a Service
Gates Foundation Grants $279M to UW Population Health Program
Precision Medicine, Genomics Partnership Boosts Big Data Sharing
Healthcare Big Data Success Starts with the Right Questions
Imaging Analytics Get Big Data Boost from New Partnerships
What Are the Clinical Analytics Lessons from EHR Adoption Data?
Precision Medicine, Population Health Share Strategies and Goals
While the line between constructive criticism and condemnation is often difficult to walk, organizations are doing their best to present the information in a positive light, as a way to boost quality rather than penalize physicians for mistakes they might not even know they’re making.  “Hospital administrators and physicians do not like to point out physicians who are underperforming because that can make the hospital look bad and make the physician feel bad,” Kim acknowledges. “Or, in many cases, that physician may get angry, hostile and argumentative. In fact, some of the worst-performing physicians are the ones who have terrible bedside manners and poor interpersonal skills. They are the last ones whom you would want to inform about poor performance.”
But scorecards and performance measurements are the key to avoiding significant financial penalties for performance issues, Gorman-Klug reminds providers, and can help nip potential reputation problems in the bud before they become endemic.  “As we’ve moved from pay-for-reporting to pay-for-performance, healthcare organizations have had to face the harsh reality of financial penalties for certain inadequacies.  In addition to patient safety, issues affecting bottom-line and reputation are truly the areas of focus for most, if not all, organizations.  It’s also important to keep in mind that much performance data is publically available.”
By combining patient-focused analytics with physician-sided reporting, organizations can create a more complete picture of their overall performance, marrying clinical data and financial data in a comprehensive way.  Analytics can help physicians identify trouble areas and develop new strategies for patient care, and help hospitals keep their reputations – and their patients – intact and thriving.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligencePopulation Health Management


