CHIME Opioid Task Force Launches to Discuss Community Health

February 02, 2018

By Jessica Kent
February 02, 2018 - On January 24 and 25, over two dozen healthcare IT leaders gathered in Washington, DC for the first meeting of the CHIME Opioid Task Force. Attendees sought to determine how to best use CHIME members’ expertise and access to critical data to help fight the opioid crisis and improve community health.
The meeting was overseen by Ed Kopetsky, CIO of Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford in Palo Alto, and Jim Turnbull, CIO of University of Utah Health in Salt Lake City. Turnbull first introduced the concept in November at the 2017 Fall CIO Forum in San Antonio.
"We need to empower and assist the healthcare community and help them see that there are pathways to success, whether that is eliminating overprescribing of opioids, finding interventions in clinical care or following best treatment practices," Turnbull said. "CHIME members have the data and skills to illuminate what has worked and what hasn't."
Dig Deeper
Hospitals Face Higher Costs, More ED Visits from Opioid Abuse
Opioid Awareness Week Focuses on Population Health Management
For Opioids and Substance Abuse, Big Data Analytics Is Just the Beginning
The CHIME Opioid Task Force will leverage the key capabilities of CHIME and its members to raise awareness and destigmatize opioid addiction. CIOs and their industry partners have the knowledge and resources that will help them identify best practices and build evidence in preventing and treating opioid misuse, the organization says.
The task force will also seek out partnerships with other organizations, front-line medical staff, researchers, caregivers and government agencies to help guide public policy.
CHIME will serve as the organizing body of the task force and is encouraging the participation of its more than 2500 members across the US and 51 other nations. CHIME’s strong relationships with other associations, industry leaders and public policy makers will serve as an additional asset to the task force.
"Opioid addiction is truly an epidemic," said Kopetsky. "As healthcare leaders committed to improving the public health in our communities, CHIME members and CHIME Foundation firms can make a difference if we work together. We have the tools and the talent, and now we have a framework to help those who are in need."
Tagged CHIMEHealthcare Big Data AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


