Can Patient Portals Provide Options for Mental Healthcare?

December 10, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 10, 2015 - Providers searching for better ways to make behavioral and mental healthcare available to their patients may not need to look much further than their own computer screens. 
As online portals and secure messaging tools become more commonplace, thanks to patient engagement initiatives included in Stage 2 meaningful use, providers may be able to leverage this line of communication to foster dialogue about depression, anxiety, and other mental health concerns.
In an article published this month in the American Journal of Managed Care, researchers examined the impact of eVisits conducted through a patient portal at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. 
They found that four percent of the 2300 patients participating in the study received a mental health diagnosis after discussing their concerns with a physician, even though mental healthcare was not a primary focus of the online diagnosis and discussion system.
While telemedicine is becoming increasingly popular for patients seeking quick answers for low-level complaints, “the appropriateness of eVisits for certain kinds of medical care is still in question,” the authors state.  “For example, patients are advised not to use eVisits for potentially high-risk symptoms such as chest pain—although cases of such use are not rare.”
READ MORE: Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
“Whether it is appropriate for patients to seek ‘e-mental health’ via a patient portal is also unclear. However, even in the absence of eVisit options designed to address depression or anxiety, patients may still seek eVisits to address common mental health needs.”
At the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, providers use an asynchronous telehealth system to deliver care to remote patients.  Users log onto a secure portal and complete a questionnaire, which is then reviewed by a physician.  The physician can then provide a diagnosis, prescribe treatments, or ask the patient to come into the office for further evaluation.
Mental health complaints are not listed among the common symptoms presented to the patients during the initial survey, but users may choose an “other” option to give them a broader range of discussion topics, facilitated by a free-text field to input their queries or concerns.
Between April 2009 and June 2012, nearly 2300 patients completed 3601 electronic visits.  Just over 23 percent of these visits included the selection of the “other” option.  More than 13 percent of patients choosing this option received a diagnosis related to mental health.   Fifty-seven percent of these diagnoses were for anxiety disorders, while a third were for mood disorders.
Patients receiving attention for mental health concerns tended to be younger than the average age of all patients using the online portal, and were more likely to be female.
READ MORE: Adult Vaccine Project Produces Population Health Best Practices
“In the absence of structured eVisits to address mental health conditions, individuals seeking mental health care appear to self-select through use of the ‘other’ eVisit option,” the study says.  The authors theorize that the number of patients diagnosed with mental health issues may be closer to the national average of 10 percent of primary care patients if specific mental health symptoms were included more prominently in the initial questionnaire.
Primary care providers have only recently started to stress the importance of integrating behavioral and mental healthcare more closely with other services.  The American Academy of Nursing (AAN) recently released a policy brief that urges primary care providers to include more social and behavioral health data into their clinical EHRs in an effort to improve population health management and ensure that patients are being treated in a holistic manner.
“Clinical care currently accounts for only 20 percent of health outcomes,” AAN notes. “To improve care and population health outcomes, healthcare providers must address other factors, including social determinants of health. To do this, we must first focus on addressing the variability in capturing and documenting social determinants in order to use this health data to benefit patients.”
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) has also recommended a closer association between clinical and behavioral healthcare, stating in 2014 that “standardized use of EHRs that include social and behavioral domains could provide better patient care, improve population health, and enable more informative research.”
Many healthcare providers, including those within the Department of Veterans Affairs, have seen great success when engaging patients in mental healthcare through online portals, mHealth, and telemedicine technologies. 
READ MORE: 21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
A 2014 study found that providing online mental health services to veterans could reduce inpatient bed days of care by a whopping 38 percent.  Between 2003 and 2013, the VA completed more than 1.1 million remote patient encounters, which helped nearly 7500 patients with chronic mental health conditions live independently.
Integrating mental health assessments and services into a provider’s patient portal strategy may help primary care providers identify more patients at risk for depression, anxiety, and other conditions, and could allow clinicians to refer these patients to behavioral health providers more quickly and effectively.
“Beyond diagnostic tools, Internet-based delivery of psychotherapy appears to be as effective as traditional in-person therapy, and may be a reasonable first-line treatment for many patients making eVisits,” the study concludes. “As the evidence base for eVisits grows, it will be important to ensure full consideration of eVisits for mental health care.”
“Assessment of the efficacy of mental health eVisits for diagnosis and entry to care remains an important area for future research. The current research helps set the stage for these investigations by showing that patients seek online care for mental health conditions in the setting of an eHealth portal even when such care is not explicitly available.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructurePatient EngagementPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


