Concerned about tracking baby boomers? Sign them up online

November 25, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 25, 2013 - If there’s one patient bracket that gets population health managers nervous, it’s the ever-expanding number of baby boomers eligible for Medicare.  How can providers track, manage, connect, and engage with older patients who will start needing treatment for chronic and complex diseases when 10,000 people are joining the over-65 cohort daily?  It might be easier than you think, because the number of baby boomers interested in connecting with physicians and managing their health online is surprisingly high.
An Accenture survey found that the Medicare set are just as interested as younger patients in using mobile apps, patient portals, and secure email to stay in touch with providers in between visits.  As of 2012, an impressive 91% of seniors were using email frequently, and nearly three-quarters use internet search engines on a regular basis.  In fact, seniors surpass the 18 to 29 year old demographic when it comes to searching for health information online, and more than half of Medicare beneficiaries have checked out their health plan’s website recently.
What does this mean for providers looking to meet Stage 2 patient engagement requirements or boost their efficiency through electronic outreach, education, and communications?  It means that the patients who will cause the most concern as they age due to the prevalence of diabetes, hypertension, obesity, and other conditions are eager as providers to stay connected to their healthcare team in order to stay on top of their own health management.
The survey of more than 9000 patients found that 67% say that accessing their health information online is very or somewhat important, with 68% desiring electronic prescription refills and 83% wishing they could view all of their health information online.  Only 46% can currently order medication refills online, and a paltry 28% have full access to their personal health record through patient portals.  Additionally, more than half of seniors wanted to book appointments through the web and email with providers to streamline their interactions.
Dig Deeper
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Three Finalists Named for $100,000 Population Health Prize
Top 5 Collaborative Tasks for Population Management, Public Health
While the debate over the use of mHealth to manage population health is still ongoing, a significant number of seniors wanted the ability to use their smartphones to access health information.  Nearly half want EHR and personal health data to be accessible to them through a mobile app, and 15% want to schedule appointments from their iPhones.  Nearly half think that being able to see a provider virtually is important – as long as it comes without a co-pay.
The broad desire among seniors to engage with providers online is good news for providers, as long as healthcare organizations devote the time and resources to developing tools that can provide meaningful services to patients while helping them with everyday administrative tasks.  With research showing that increased communication and engagement can lead to better outcomes for patients with diabetes and high blood pressure, providing channels of communication between patients and providers could be key to successful population health management among the millions of Americans over 65.
Tagged Healthcare Data StrategymHealthPatient DataPatient EngagementPopulation Health


