Who needs to be on the team for healthcare analytics?

October 09, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 09, 2013 - There’s no magic analytics genie waiting to transform your practice into an agile, data-savvy utopia.  It takes hard work, advanced planning, and buy-in from everyone involved in collecting, storing, manipulating, and using data throughout the organization.  Who needs to be involved with the design and execution of an analytics effort as a hospital system moves towards integrating clinical and business intelligence into patient care?
The C-suite
It’s hard to do anything in a business without a stamp of approval from the board room.  Analytics is a far-reaching and expensive proposition, and it requires a revolution in the way organizations think about patient data as an asset and a tool.  The good news is that the C-suite is already feeling the pinch when it comes to the financial repercussions of not using data to its fullest.  Low scores on quality measures cost money.  Patient dissatisfaction costs reputation points.  Preventable readmissions can incur enormous fines from Medicare, and the bottom line takes a direct hit.
But results have to happen quickly, argues John Walton, solutions manager at CTG Health Solutions. “We’ve seen a lot of instances where there’s a lot of enthusiasm and investment in analytics programs, but then it dies on the vine fairly quickly because it’s just another bunch of reports and the whole effort gets overwhelmed by the sheer number of other initiatives,” he says.
The key is to have an executive champion, usually a Chief Medical Officer or Chief Medical Information Officer, who can formulate a strong governance plan, understand the reports and pie charts, and explain exactly what is going on to any impatient colleagues.
READ MORE: EHR Analytics Track C. Diff Patients to Flag Infection Trends
The tech guys
The data warehouse is increasingly becoming the beating heart of the hospital, and the huge, humming servers in the basement need caretakers and cultivators.  A robust IT infrastructure is essential to any analytics strategy, and so are the people who understand how to keep data flowing from every part of the organization as well as to and from external partners.  Choosing a warehouse data model that works for your organization’s needs is crucial, and figuring out ways to create standardized data elements and break down silos of information is the only way analytics can work.
“Hospitals are data rich, but what I see in the hospital setting is that their data is all siloed and they don’t know how to integrate it,” says Andrea Clark, CEO and Chairman of Health Revenue Assurance Holdings (HRAA). “They know they have data but they don’t know how to pull it together, and many times departments don’t think out of the box to say, ‘We can grab it from over here and we can grab it from over there and bring it all together into a dashboard.’ That thinking process is still stalled.”
While the IT department may have jurisdiction over the server room, every department in the hospital that uses analytics will be drawing on that single pool of data.  That makes the data warehouse communal property, and much more than just an IT project.  The CMO or CMIO in charge of the overarching analytics program must recognize that analytics goes far beyond the technical, says Walton.  If not, he says, “That’s a recipe for disaster.  There’s really no other way to say it.”
The informaticists
READ MORE: Physician-Level Data May Not Reduce Opioid Prescription Rates
Another key player in the data game is the information expert.  Once the data is manipulated into a usable format, someone has to understand how to turn it into financial and clinical action.  That’s where informaticists come in.  Whether they are nurses with special training or academics taking advantage of the proliferation of higher degrees in the information sciences, you simply must have health information management and informatics professionals on hand to translate numbers into improvements.
“Using EHRs, nurses can now look across patient populations, sort and group patients by specific characteristics, advise on evidence-based diagnoses, treatments and interventions, and measure progress in real-time,” says Dr. Susan Sportsman RN, PhD, ANEF, FAAN, a nurse informaticist. “Technology will be invaluable in helping nurses to monitor, anticipate and respond to patients’ health needs. Equally important is using technology to collect, interpret and evaluate data on measurable outcomes of care, including quality, cost, cost savings, emergency department and hospital utilization and disease management and improvement.”
The end-users
Ultimately, the point of all this work is to help clinicians make better decisions at the point of care.  The end user of clinical analytics is the physician who double checks a diabetic patient’s eyesight, and the outreach educator who goes door to door telling families about the importance of the measles vaccine.  From the big picture down to the visuals of integrating data into clinical decision support tools, everyone on the team must keep in mind how the data will be used to benefit the patient.
“It can’t be big computer systems in the sky if it doesn’t get all the way down to Dr. Peterson seeing Mrs. Jones,” says Keith Dunleavy, MD, President and CEO of Inovalon.  “How are the two of them, in that encounter, benefiting from all that advanced technology?  That’s what we’re doing, and we’re doing it in a way that can navigate through all these different pipes.  It’s all about getting analytics to the point of care.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataClinical AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare Data Strategy


