UCLA Research Center to Focus on Healthcare Big Data Analytics

December 30, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 30, 2014 - Researchers and faculty at UCLA will be diving into big data analytics at the newly formed Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biosciences (QCBio), a multi-disciplinary collaboration that hopes to foster personalized medicine.  Headed by Alexander Hoffmann, a professor of genetics, immunology, and microbiology, the Institute will attempt to answer pressing questions about the impact of genetics and other biological factors on the development and treatment of cancer, infectious disease, and additional conditions.
“UCLA’s Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biosciences will have a major, positive impact on human health,” said UCLA Chancellor Gene Block. “It will engage exceptional faculty from the life sciences and physical sciences, and our David Geffen School of Medicine and Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science to ensure that UCLA is at the forefront of research that will help usher in a new era of personalized health care, and to transform research and education in the biosciences.”
QCBio will “serve as an intellectual home for researchers” looking to integrate the disciplines of biology, bioinformatics, and quantitative modeling, said UCLA College Dean Victoria L. Sork in a statement.  It will also include a number of opportunities for postdoctoral students and researchers to take part in workshops, consultations, and seminars, bringing together a variety of specialty focuses to work on decoding genetic puzzles that have a direct impact on healthcare.
“Technological breakthroughs are enabling scientists to analyze not only one gene at a time, but how hundreds or thousands of genes work together,” Sork said. “Combined with big data, new knowledge of critical gene networks will lead us to a better understanding of what makes humans healthy.”
Dig Deeper
FDA Holds App-a-Thon for Precision Medicine, Next-Gen Genomics
NIH Opens Up “All of Us” to Research Participants Nationwide
Cancer Moonshot Unveils 10 Big Data Tasks for Curing Cancer
“Biology is entering a new phase,” added Hoffmann. “So far, biology has been much less math-based than the other sciences. Since the sequencing of the human genome in the early 2000s, there has been an irreversible change in the way biology and biomedical research are being done. At UCLA, we will lead research in that direction and connect basic and applied sciences in an unprecedentedly productive collaboration.”
The Institute is one of a number of similar projects cropping up at academic centers across the country as researchers form partnerships and collaborations in an attempt to harness the full potential of big data analytics.  The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is supporting such work by offering grant money to expand opportunities for minority students in the biomedical research sciences, and places an emphasis on such cross-disciplinary collaboration as QCBio will embrace.
“The biomedical research enterprise must engage all sectors of the population in order to solve the most complex biological problems and discover innovative new ways to improve human health,” said NIH Director Dr. Francis S. Collins. “While past efforts to diversify our workforce have had significant impact on individuals, we have not made substantial progress in expanding diversity on a larger scale. This program will test new models of training and mentoring so that we can ultimately attract the best minds from all groups to biomedical research.”
QCBio is currently seeking faculty to complete its ranks as operations get underway.  Researchers with expertise in bioinformatics, genomics, and computational biology are encouraged to apply for research or mentorship opportunities.
  Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsMedical Research


