All-cause mortality rates in MA drop 3% after healthcare reform

May 06, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 06, 2014 - Population health management begins with ensuring that the maximum number of patients have access to the best possible care, a difficult and politically contentious process that has turned the healthcare industry upside down since the Affordable Care Act passed in 2009.  Massachusetts, however, has been waging the war since 2006, when it became the first state in the nation to require healthcare insurance for everyone.  Now, a new study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine this week lends support to the proposition that increasing coverage saves lives, especially among the socioeconomically challenged:  the study shows a 3% decline in all-cause mortality by 2010.
“This is an important piece of the puzzle,” Katherine Baicker, a professor of health economics at the Harvard School of Public Health, said to the New York Times. “Putting the evidence together paints a very strong picture that expanding insurance substantially improves the well-being of people who get it.”
The study examined counties within Massachusetts and 513 similar demographic regions in 46 other states in order to determine the changes in mortality.  While areas such as Suffolk County, which includes Boston, saw a mortality drop of up to 7 percent, the death rates in the counties located in other states remained flat.  This indicates that the insurance coverage was a major defining factor that played a significant role in the changes.
“Changes were larger in counties with lower household incomes and higher pre-reform uninsured rates,” the study says. “Secondary analyses showed significant gains in coverage, access to care, and self-reported health. The number needed to treat was approximately 830 adults gaining health insurance to prevent 1 death per year.”  Nationally, a 3% drop in mortality would equal about 17,000 lives per year.
Dig Deeper
Cancer Mortality Rates See 20% Drop, but Disparities Remain
“Big Data Spokes” Tackle Population Health with IoT, Informatics
Machine Learning Identifies Ovarian Cancer with 91% Accuracy
The most significant declines were related to common conditions that have previously been identified by the CDC as the top causes of death in the nation: heart attacks and cancer.  Deaths from complications related to diabetes also dropped during the study period, which may indicate overall better chronic disease management due to more regular contact with providers who can monitor symptoms and disseminate education to patients suffering from these conditions.
Tagged Healthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


