Video discharge notes 3.5 times more effective for patients

December 17, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 17, 2013 - Patients and caregivers who are given video instructions upon leaving the emergency department are 3.5 times more likely to understand and retain the information given to them about their care than patients who are only given written instructions, according to a National Institutes of Health study.  Patients often remember less than half of the directions given to them during a physician visit, which can lead to medication non-compliance and quick relapses that carry stiff financial penalties for hospitals.
In the study, which included more than 130 patients with an average age of 46, participants were given either written or pre-vetted, diagnosis-specific video instructions after leaving the ED.  Researchers then called the patients and asked a series of questions designed to rate their information retention and comprehension.  Patients who received the video instructions not only got much higher scores on the questionnaire, but were also highly likely to rate the videos as helpful.
“Good discharge instructions may prevent subsequent hospitalizations and lessen repeat emergency department visits in an already overwhelmed system; however, the time it takes to provide detailed discharge instructions to each and every patient seen in the emergency department may be prohibitive,” writes Dr. Clare Atzema of the University of Toronto.  With ED over-crowding a chronic problem for the majority of healthcare organizations, “discharge instructions may be truncated in an effort to see more patients.”  Physicians only spend an average of 76 seconds on post-ED directions to begin with.
An additional study from the Medical College of Georgia found that parents of children who presented to the ED with fever, vomiting, or asthma symptoms also scored significantly higher on post-discharge health literacy when shown a video compared to written instructions.  When asked to rate the helpfulness of their directions, 42% of the video viewers responded positively as compared to only 29% of paper-based patients.
Dig Deeper
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Leveraging the Patient-Centered Medical Home for Older Adult Care
“As the population ages and emergency department crowding worsens, innovations are needed to minimize the effect of crowding on time spent explaining discharge instructions to patients,” Atzema concludes.  “Particularly in light of shortened doctor-patient interactions times, this tool should be offered to patients to supplement standard care.”
Tagged Accountable CareHospital ReadmissionsPatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


