Safety net patients twice as likely to need diabetic amputations

August 11, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 11, 2014 - Low-income patients living in poorer areas of California are nearly twice as likely to experience amputations of the lower limbs due to diabetes, finds a new study in Health Affairs, with black and Spanish-speaking patients requiring foot or leg amputations at a significantly above-average rate.  By mapping diabetic patients according to residential location, the authors were able to identify “hot spots” where amputation rates were far above the state average, flagging opportunities for providers to target primary care interventions.
“I think our findings show that the medical safety net has big holes in it and people are often falling through those holes and losing their limbs to diabetes when those complications could have been prevented with better care,” said Dr. Carl D. Stevens, Clinical Professor of Health Sciences at the David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA.  “Patients who live in low-income neighborhoods have less awareness of the disease and consequences.”
The study examined 7,973 amputations in 6,828 adult diabetic patients from 2009, using census data to correlate incidences with the socioeconomic status of the neighborhoods in which they occurred.  While the black population accounted for just 6% of diabetics in the state, they experienced 13% of amputations related to the disease.  Primarily Spanish-speaking patients comprised 9% of the diabetic population but 17% of amputations.  Amputations in the very poorest regions were ten times as prevalent as in the very richest neighborhoods, Stevens notes.
The study reinforces what most population health managers have already known: socioeconomic status plays a significant role in overall patient health.  A recent study by the American Heart Association found that patients with lower socioeconomic status are 7% more likely to experience hospital readmissions for cardiac diseases, and that geographic location plays a major part in access to care, primary care follow-up, and subsequent complications.
Dig Deeper
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Top 5 Collaborative Tasks for Population Management, Public Health
Kaiser Permanente Program Reduces Cardiovascular Disease Risks
“For patients suffering from diabetes and other chronic conditions, a large body of work demonstrates income-related disparities in access to coordinated preventive care.  Comparisons of the maps show amputation “hot spots” in lower-income urban and rural regions of California,” the study concludes. “Our analysis does not support detailed causal inferences. However, our method for mapping complication hot spots using public data sources may help target interventions to the communities most in need.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


