AAFP to ONC: Don’t Blame Docs for EHR Interoperability Woes

October 13, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 13, 2015 - No matter how hard they try, family physicians simply can’t make EHR interoperability magically appear when working with substandard software, and shouldn’t be shouldering the blame for the industry’s current data exchange predicament, claims Robert Wergin, MD, FAAFP, Board Chair of the American Academy of Family Physicians. 
In a letter to National Coordinator Karen DeSalvo published in response to the ONC’s final interoperability roadmap, Wergin takes issue with the fact that healthcare providers are often the ones to suffer most for the mistakes of vendors and regulators, and yet they are also frequently cited as the ones responsible for the industry’s slow progress towards meaningful health information exchange.
“Our members and the AAFP are very concerned with the very slow progress toward achieving truly interoperable systems,” Wergin writes. “While we appreciate this national interoperability roadmap and its demonstration of ONC’s responsiveness to the health care community, we do not sense the necessary level of urgency to achieve this important goal and call on ONC to further accelerate this work.”
“Furthermore, we strongly believe there is need for increased accountability on industry and decreased accountability on those who are using their inadequate products.  We need more than a roadmap; we need action,” he declares.
Finger-pointing is nothing new in the health data interoperability debate.  The Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (HELP) has conducted several hearings that have tried to get to the root of the problem, and testimony from industry stakeholders often veered into expostulations on where the responsibility for inadequate communication truly lies.
READ MORE: As FHIR Matures, Healthcare Interoperability Comes into Focus
The ONC’s roadmap, released last week after being tweaked and polished following a lengthy public comment period, attempts to chart a communal course towards interoperability over the next five to ten years. 
But the finalized document was made public on the same day that CMS published its final flexibility rule for Stage 2 and Stage 3 meaningful use between 2015 and 2017.  The combination of the two frameworks, in conjunction with continued uncertainty over the design and implementation of the Merit-Based Incentive Programs (MIPS), has left some stakeholders feeling like providers are still getting the short end of the regulatory stick.
Without the foundational EHR interoperability capabilities that will allow providers to coordinate care, manage population health, and monitor their own performance with clinical and operational analytics, providers have little hope of successfully navigating the future requirements of meaningful use, let alone the accountable care features of MIPS and other healthcare reform efforts.
“This lack of interoperability and the burden of meaningful use is propelling the health care system down a path that is about to collide with the new MACRA law requirements,” Wergin points out. “Because primary care practices are at capacity, every minute that physicians and their practice staff spend on managing administrative complexity and doing the work health IT should be automating is precious time removed from their focus on patients to deliver better care, better health and lower cost.”
The AAFP joins other professional groups and several prominent lawmakers in reiterating calls for a delay to Stage 3 meaningful use, which will give vendors enough time to focus on making their current offerings more interoperable, and allow providers the breathing space they need to implement, optimize, and leverage new EHR infrastructure that puts interoperability at the center of the workflow.
READ MORE: What Healthcare IT Users Don’t Really Need to Know about FHIR
“We do not have until 2024 to improve interoperability,” warns Wergin. “If we want physicians and other clinicians to transform their practices and be successful in the value based payment models established by MACRA, then we must ensure that the information technology infrastructure is capable of assisting them versus preventing them from succeeding as is generally the case today.”
After billions of dollars in meaningful use incentives and eight years after the creation of the Continuity of Care Record (CCR), providers are barely any closer to being able to ensure care coordination and safe transitions of care, adds Wergin.
“The current bloated, semantically-poor documents are not able to be interpreted by their certified EHR technology,” he says. “Instead, physicians must view the documents on the screen, just as they would a fax, to find the important information. Then they must re-key that information into their EHR if they want to incorporate some of the summary information into the patient’s record.”
“That is unacceptable given the power of today’s information technology and we believe this is the fault of the vendors and their lack of accountability while reaping huge profits from the HITECH act. Vendors, not providers, must be held fiscally accountable for not yet achieving an appropriate level of interoperability.”
Most vendors might protest that they are doing all they can to deliver high quality products that meet the needs of the healthcare industry, and that developers, too, are hamstrung by tight regulatory deadlines – and that providers didn’t really advocate loudly enough for interoperability at the beginning of the EHR Incentive Programs, when the rush to install EHRs in pursuit of incentive dollars was a much stronger market driver than the vision of nationwide data exchange.
READ MORE: Can $10B Solve Healthcare’s Big Data Analytics, Productivity Woes?
Now that accountable care and value-based reimbursement arrangements are taking off in earnest, however, the impetus has shifted.  Providers who implemented EHRs that were specifically tailored for meaningful use are finding that their technology is no longer adequate to the tasks ahead of them – if they were even adequate in the first place – and many organizations simply don’t have the funding or the wherewithal to rip out their infrastructure by the roots.
While playing the blame game won’t necessarily help to solve the problems at hand, providers can be forgiven for feeling as if they’re caught in the middle of a very expensive game of monkey-in-the-middle.   
Some lawmakers are trying to offer some small sense of compensation to providers who feel cheated by EHRs that don’t work as advertised.  In new bi-partisan legislation introduced this week, Senators Bill Cassidy (R-LA) and Sheldon Whitehouse (D-RI) are hoping to retool the EHR certification process to make it easier for providers to identify products that meet top-shelf industry standards. 
The bill would impose fines or decertification for EHRs that don’t measure up.  Providers who had unwittingly purchased these products would be entitled to financial compensation for their investment, which may help to soften the blow.
However, until such provisions make their way through the legislative process and into the real world, healthcare organizations must find other ways to increase their interoperability competencies and make meaningful health data exchange a reality.
The task is a daunting one, Wergin says, but the industry has to rise to the challenge.  “In our view, this is the health care system’s moonshot, which was declared with the 2009 passage of the HITECH Act,” he wrote.
“Remember that from the time of President Kennedy’s declaration to achievement of safely returning a man from the moon took less than ten years. We have already been working for six years with much better technology than they had in the 1960’s. We should be much closer to our goal and it should be accomplished within ten years (2019).”
“The hard work is ahead – everyone including technology vendors, hospitals, health systems, pharmacies, local health and social service centers and physicians, must come together as a nation to achieve the interoperability levels laid out in this roadmap at a more rapid pace.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealth Information ExchangeInteroperabilityMeaningful Use


