Care coordination, analytics aid diabetes patients at Joslin

January 22, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 22, 2014 - Joslin Diabetes Center of Boston is launching a new clinical analytics pilot at Truman Medical Centers (TMC) in Missouri to test the effectiveness of the Joslin Clinical Analytical Tool (JCAT) in reducing care gaps and flagging patient risks.  The tool not only identifies specific areas for patient intervention, but also provides suggestions and reports that help providers make actionable improvements.
“We are delighted to be working with Truman Medical Centers on this project. TMC has a well-documented track record of delivering innovative programs to help people live healthier lives,” said Director of Medical Affairs, Healthcare Services, Joslin Diabetes Center and Associate Professor, Harvard Medical School, Rich Jackson, MD. “We are also very impressed by TMC’s commitment to its community and the great work that it continues in this realm as well. TMC is an ideal partner for implementing an innovative program such as JCAT.”
“Each year, nearly 70% of TMC’s patient base has at least one major chronic disease, with diabetes being the second largest group behind hypertension,” added TMC Executive Vice President of Clinical Coordination, Mark McPhee, MD. Truman Medical Centers is the primary teaching hospital for the University of Missouri Kansas City Schools of Medicine.  “Partnering with Joslin Diabetes Center allows TMC to make innovative advancements in the methods of care for people with diabetes at the primary care level while at the same time exposing the JCAT to a unique patient base.”
The tool will help physicians gauge the effectiveness of their care and identify potential gaps earlier than would be possible without data analytics.  In early tests, the JCAT tool has been shown to be effective in improving outcomes for diabetic patients.
Dig Deeper
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
The pilot follows a Joslin study that shows making use of EHRs in conjunction with care coordinators in a patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model can help raise outcomes and patient satisfaction while reducing risk.  The study compared 25 primary care PCMHs with nurses, social workers, or medical assistants acting as care coordinators for patients.
“The practices that demonstrated the greatest diabetes improvement described more patient-centered care manager duties, better use of the electronic medical record (EMR) for messaging and patient tracking, and stronger integration of the care manager into the care team,” explained Dr. Robert Gabbay, MD, PhD, FACP, Chief Medical Officer and Senior Vice President at Joslin. “Practitioners and patients both preferred embedded nurse care managers that were typically a nurse in order to focus wholly on the patient and their medial needs critical for the highest risk patients.”
“Diabetes is a common chronic disease to study in PCMH transformation, as the diabetes population is a perfect example of patients that already require care coordination,” Gabbay said. “Specialty care can serve as the prime example of care coordination and used as a ‘best practice hub’ to teach primary care practices how to best meet clinical quality goals for diabetes patients.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsCare CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


