EHR Interoperability, Data Standards Vital for DOD, VA Success

August 17, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 17, 2015 - The Department of Defense may have just pledged between four and nine billion dollars to modernizing its EHR infrastructure with Leidos, Cerner, and Accenture over the next decade, but it must make a further commitment to EHR interoperability and strong, communal data standards if it wants to truly integrate patient care with the Department of Veterans Affairs. 
In a report issued this month by the Government Accountability Office (GAO), interoperability watchdogs raise the same old flags as they outline what the military health system must do in order to foster health information exchange – and big data analytics – in one of the nation’s largest and most complex healthcare services.
The sprawling and convoluted DOD-VA interoperability project has a long and dismal history of failures punctuated by fits and starts towards infrastructure improvements and incremental progress towards more coordinated care across the two departments. 
Since 1998, the DOD and VA have attempted to retool legacy systems to exchange data and develop a virtual lifetime health record for service men and women throughout their careers and retirement, the report details.  Yet even after nearly twenty years of brainstorming, patients continue to fall through care coordination gaps opened by a lack of interoperability and health data exchange.
Dig Deeper
As FHIR Matures, Healthcare Interoperability Comes into Focus
ONC Views APIs as Key to Health Data Exchange, Interoperability
What Healthcare IT Users Don’t Really Need to Know about FHIR
After a series of angry Congressional tongue-lashings in 2014 that highlighted a lack of oversight, billions in wasted funds, and contentious finger-pointing among military leaders, the departments leapt into action, announcing their intentions to choose and implement new health IT products to meet national data standards.  Under the guidance of the Interagency Program Office (IPO), the DOD and the VA are currently increasing health information exchange and interoperability between their disparate systems.
However, interoperability has not been moving fast enough to satisfy a series of missed deadlines: in 2014, the DOD and VA failed to take actions that would bring them into compliance with national data standards as directed by Congress, and neither department appears to be working swiftly enough to meet the December 31, 2016 date to implement modern EHR software that will provide full, standards-based interoperability to clinicians practicing across the world.  The DOD does not plan to be ready to begin installing its new EHR system until 2018.
“DOD has issued plans and announced the contract award for acquiring a modernized system to include interoperability capabilities across military operations,” the report explains. “In addition, VA has issued plans describing an incremental approach to modernizing its existing electronic health records system. These plans—if implemented as currently described— indicate that deployment of the new systems with interoperability capabilities will not be completed across the departments until after 2018.”
While the IPO has been trying to manage and guide the unwieldy project by identifying metrics to monitor progress towards interoperability, “IPO has not identified a time frame for when this team will report its results and when the IPO plans to incorporate these metrics and goals into its guidance,” GAO points out. “Without ensuring that outcome-oriented metrics and related goals are defined and incorporated into the current approach, the departments and the IPO will not be positioned to assess and report on the status of interoperability-related activities and determine areas that need improvement.”
By failing to establish firm time frames and parameters for the inter-departmental efforts, IPO is putting the project at risk of failure.  With the lives and wellbeing of 6.3 million veterans and 9.6 active military members on the line, this lack of definition for such an enormous task may be a major misstep.
As the Leidos Partnership for Defense Health enters the scene, relying in part on Cerner Corporation’s expertise with interoperability and large-scale EHR implementations in the commercial sector, the DOD may be getting the help it needs to finally meet the data exchange objectives established so long ago. 
Corresponding efforts by the VA to revamp its well-regarded VistA platform could finally position both departments to develop a truly standards-based data exchange ecosystem, but sustained effort from the DOD, VA, and IPO will be required to ensure the project gets off the ground this time.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealth Information ExchangeInteroperability


