Analytics brings actionable data to Colorado Medicaid program

November 06, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 06, 2013 - Colorado’s successful Accountable Care Collaborative (ACC) is working wonders for the state’s Medicaid programs, taking an unmanaged fee-for-service system into the future with a deeper focus on care coordination, medical homes, and reduced costs across the board.  Colorado has enlisted the help of their Statewide Data Analytics Contractor (SDAC) to turn patient data into actionable results.  The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured released an issue brief explaining how Colorado is taking advantage of analytics to bring better care to their citizens.
The ACC’s action plan consists of three parts: a medical home centered on a patient’s primary care provider, a network of regional care collaborative organizations responsible for assigning these medical homes and managing the coordination of care, and the SDAC, which provides the other branches of the system with the intelligence they need to get the job done.  SDAC serves as a centralized data repository providing access to larger-scale data for patient-specific needs as well as population health management.
Previously, the ACC struggled with the traditional Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) used in many other states, which allowed insight into enrollment and claims data, but little else.  “For accountable care, you need standardized, risk-adjusted measures to hold providers accountable for clinical performance; and to improve clinical performance, providers need actionable data,” explains one state official in the report.  SDAC takes data from the MMIS, pools it in a centralized warehouse that updates on a monthly basis, and distributes the necessary information to organizations state-wide through an online portal.
While SDAC currently does not have access to EHR data or other information available from the state’s health information exchanges, it represents one of the first attempts at an analytics infrastructure on the state level, structured to support care management for the individual beneficiary while providing valuable insight for providers about all their patients, and the community at large on a population health management scale.  SDAC also incorporates an analytics suite that allows predictive modeling, risk stratification, performance tracking, and variable parameters to help providers run targeted reports for areas of concern.
Dig Deeper
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
What Does “Pick Your Own Pace” MACRA Mean for Data Analytics?
CIOs Focus on EHR Optimization for Population Health, Analytics
State officials envision SDAC as the basis for the ongoing integration of analytics into more areas of care as the health IT infrastructure of the state evolves.  Colorado’s health information exchanges, Colorado Regional Health Information Organization (CORHIO) and Quality Health Network (QHN) may take on a larger role in analytics as they mature, adding their expertise in handling EHR data to the network.  While HIEs face their own challenges when it comes to analytics capabilities, it is encouraging that Colorado recognizes the need for future partnerships with similarly-minded organizations.
Under the ACC model, hospital readmissions for Medicare beneficiaries decreased around 15% and unnecessary high-cost imaging declined by a quarter.  More than 350,000 patients are currently served by the program.  The ACC has already saved $44 million in “cost avoidance” during the 2012 fiscal year, most of which will return to community providers and regional care organizations as performance incentives. “In terms of savings, the program has exceeded our expectations,” deputy Medicaid director Laurel Karabatsos said in a media release. “Next year at this time, we expect to be talking not only about savings, but also about all the ways the program provides value to our providers, clients and the community.”
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsAnalytics InfrastructureHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare Data StrategyPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


