CMS, AMA Compromise on ICD-10 Implementation Flexibility

July 07, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 07, 2015 - The dreaded ICD-10 implementation process may be getting a little bit easier for healthcare providers when October 1, 2015 finally rolls around, CMS and the American Medical Association (AMA) said in a joint announcement this week.  The two organizations, which have butted heads for years over the timing and process of the ICD-10 switch, have agreed on flexibility provisions that may mitigate some of the potential financial impacts of the transition. 
For twelve months after the implementation date, claims will not be denied solely because of the specificity of an ICD-10 code, nor will providers be penalized for a lack of specificity during quality reporting and auditing.  CMS will also authorize advanced payments to providers if Medicare contractors experience technical problems while processing ICD-10 claims. 
While the announcement does not go quite as far as “grace period” advocates hope – legislation introduced into Congress aims to establish a denials amnesty for two years instead of just twelve months – CMS is demonstrating its understanding that ICD-10 implementation might not go quite as smoothly as anticipated. 
It also demonstrates the AMA’s acceptance that October 1, 2015 is almost certainly going to be the beginning of the ICD-10 era, an acknowledgement that represents a major shift in the society’s attitude towards the new codes.
“Implementation of the ICD-10 code set is just around the corner, with a hard deadline of October 1,” stated AMA President Steven J. Stack, MD in the Association’s announcement. “Although physicians now have a yearlong transition period, now is still the time to buckle down and make sure your practice is as prepared as possible ahead of October 1.”
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
CMS and the AMA will join forces to provide last-minute education and transition resources to the healthcare community, including on-site training, national provider calls, and web-based articles and information.  CMS will also establish an ICD-10 Ombudsman, who will help to sift through provider questions and concerns, coordinating with regional organizations to resolve potential issues.
“As we work to modernize our nation’s health care infrastructure, the coming implementation of ICD-10 will set the stage for better identification of illness and earlier warning signs of epidemics, such as Ebola or flu pandemics.” said Andy Slavitt, Acting Administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. “With easy to use tools, a new ICD-10 Ombudsman, and added flexibility in our claims audit and quality reporting process, CMS is committed to working with the physician community to work through this transition.”
In its guidance, CMS reminds providers that valid ICD-10 codes must be used for dates of service beginning October 1.  Claims must include a code from the right ICD-10 family in order to be processed, even if it is not the most terminal code available.  Claims may still be denied or audited for reasons that have nothing to do with ICD-10 code specificity.
The slower approach to ICD-10 implementation may assuage the fears of unprepared providers, but it will do nothing to appease the frustrations of data integrity advocates who hope to improve the health system’s ability to generate detailed, granular, and meaningful big data for clinical analytics, population health management, and quality improvements.
The Coalition for ICD-10 recently blasted “grace period” supporters for their misunderstanding of ICD-10 specificity requirements, pointing to high acceptance rates for ICD-10 end-to-end testing claims as evidence that CMS has never had any intention of unduly penalizing providers for their code choices. 
READ MORE: Data Governance Key to Hospital’s Natural Language Query Project
Noting that there is “always a clinically accurate but less granular code available” for providers should clinical documentation not support the most detailed option, the Coalition believes that these attempts to create a safe harbor for providers are simply playing into artificially inflated concerns.
AHIMA is also wary of CMS’ efforts to promote leniency, which may have significant downstream impacts on data integrity, governance, and quality.  “With no official repercussions for inaccurate coding the door is wide open for both improperly paid claims at best and rampant fraud at worst-since proper payment of claims depends on accurate coding,” says the organization in a letter it hopes its members will send to their Congressional representatives in opposition to the “safe harbor” proposal.  “This bill is written in a manner that leaves the door open for up-coding and possibly outright fraud.”
While healthcare stakeholders will have to wait until October 1 to see how these provisions will affect the ICD-10 implementation, the fact that the AMA has finally gotten on board with the idea of the imminent transition may be good news for the industry, which has suffered from the rampant uncertainty of multiple transition delays.  Hopefully, providers who might have dragged their feet on preparation during the beginning of 2015, angling for another push-back, will join the AMA in recognizing that ICD-10 is coming both quickly and inevitably this year.
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10


