Why Is CDI Important for Clinical Analytics, Data Integrity?

October 20, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 20, 2014 - ICD-10 might be the first thing that comes to mind when it comes to clinical documentation improvement (CDI), but fine-tuning the structure, detail, and content of the clinical note is an initiative that has far-reaching benefits for everything from clinical analytics to revenue cycle management to pay-for-performance contract negotiations.  What are the basic principles of clinical documentation improvement and how can healthcare organizations leverage CDI for clinical analytics?
Establishing organizational information governance
CDI is just a small part of what should be a comprehensive approach to information governance.  Health information management professionals must establish guidelines for how healthcare data will be produced, managed, stored, exchanged, and analyzed so that the organization can maximize the potential of using data as a business asset.  With the vast majority of healthcare organizations admitting that they do not have the infrastructure and knowhow to use big data to its fullest potential, there are a number of opportunities available to use the EHR as the foundation of an information overhaul.
Establishing an information governance framework must come before any efforts centered on CDI in order to ensure that the improved clinical documentation will meet the HIM goals of the organization.  AHIMA offers a set of eight basic principles for healthcare organizations seeking to implement this basic infrastructure, which cover data integrity, staff accountability, privacy and security, and availability.
Engaging clinicians for documentation improvement
Once the organization has established the goals of data governance, securing staff buy-in will be critical for creating and maintaining improvements.  While ICD-10 is certainly a pressing motivator, some providers have had more success with CDI when they take the new code set off the table completely.
“Clinical documentation will be improved not just in quality, but in time of delivery,” said Dr. Reid Conant of Conant and Associates, a practicing emergency department physician at Tri-City Medical Center in California.  “There will be secondary benefits even beyond the revenue benefits for the organization and provider.  That’s something that’s exciting from a clinical perspective.”
At TriHealth Medical in Ohio, Dr. Georges Feghali Chief Medical Officer and Chief Quality Officer found success with promoting CDI as a way to help clinicians accurately communicate with coders. “We needed a bridge between clinical language and coding language, and we needed to explain to physicians that the coders cannot always interpret what they’re thinking.  My doctors were looking like terrible physicians just because they weren’t documenting care the right way.”
“As a physician, I don’t want too many things when it comes to documentation,” he added.  “Don’t make me lie; don’t make me do it for financial purposes.  Tell me why we do it, and I will change the behavior. I don’t think there’s a physician on earth who is going to say, ‘I don’t care how I look, so I’m going to keep writing it the wrong way.’”
Expanding analytics with detailed clinical data
While structured data is often considered the cornerstone of clinical analytics, free-text information from clinical notes can be just as important for developing population health management programs and actionable insights.
“I think we’re reaching a point of sophistication in the technology where we’re going to be doing a lot more with unstructured data storage or data repositories,” Wes Wright, Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer at Seattle Children’s Hospital, said to HealthITAnalytics.
But “free-text” doesn’t mean “free-for-all” when it comes to the integrity of clinical documentation.  Even though natural language processing (NLP) has vastly improved its ability to extract meaning from loosely structured text over the past few years, not even the best NLP technology can find what isn’t there.  Without ensuring that physicians are documenting the full patient record with adequate detail, there will be gaps in the care record can have significant consequences not only for analytics, but also for reimbursement and the scope of care provided to a patient.
“I’ve been doing CDI for 15 years and physicians still don’t provide all the details needed to ensure appropriate, thorough documentation,” says Mel Tully, MSN, CCDS, CDIP and Vice President of Clinical Services and Education at Nuance.  “Unless they’re being prompted and given a tool or person to help guide them, they will always document pneumonia as pneumonia.  There are many, many other ways to document it and even today, physicians still need guidance on how best to capture the specific details needed to accurately reflect the severity of the care provided.”
Improving overall quality measurement for accountable care, reporting
With a solid foundation of detailed, accurate documentation, clinical analytics can drive improved decision making and help catch the development of complications before they begin.  Not only does this improve patient safety, shorten hospital stays, and raise quality scores, but it can also contribute to reduced spending and better outcomes for pay-for-performance reimbursement arrangements.
“It’s really important that we have clean data that can address issues not only of quality, but also of cost,” stated 2013-2014 AHIMA President Angela Kennedy, EdD, MBA, RHIA at this year’s convention in San Diego. “If we have that, and we put those principles in place, it’ll really be a catalyst to help organizations make the most of their assets.”
“Making the most of their assets” is, in a nutshell, why CDI is such a vital part of a healthcare organization’s journey towards joining the data-driven healthcare reform revolution.  Health information management professionals may be responsible for shepherding data through its lifecycle, but without the cooperation, skill, and attention of the clinical staff that is creating that data in the first place, healthcare organizations will come up short in the data game.
Organizations do not have the luxury of foisting CDI onto the ICD-10 team for a quick shot in the arm: it must be an ongoing commitment to quality that fits in with a larger push for data integrity, information management, and clinical analytics that will drive success under increasingly tight financial and clinical parameters.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical DataHealth Information Management


