Two-Thirds of Patients Willing to use mHealth, Engage Online

February 25, 2015

By Stephanie Reardon
February 25, 2015 - Sixty-six percent of Americans would like to use a mobile health (mHealth) app for their health-related problems, according to the Makovsky/Kelton fifth annual “Pulse of Online Health”survey . The results show Americans are moving toward patient engagement.
The survey included responses from 1,015 Americans aged 18 and over, and indicated that respondents, especially millennials, are open to the increase of mobile device and app usage in healthcare. The mHealth apps downloaded and utilized most were nutritional trackers (47 percent), medication reminders (46 percent), symptom trackers (45 percent) and activity trackers (44 percent). Survey participants wanted informative, purposeful programs, improving patient engagement in their own healthcare.
“Smartphones and wearables are driving a major behavioral shift in consumer health and wellness,” said Gil Bashe, executive vice president, Makovsky Health. “Beyond a desire to speed access to information, consumers are using technology to engage proactively in managing their health – and a personality of ‘search’ is influenced by specific medical conditions. We also see stark differences between Millennials and those 66 and older in this year’s survey. Savvy health marketers will apply these insights to engage and involve patients in more meaningful, customized ways.”
The motivation to use these types of mobile apps fluctuated based on each respondent’s health conditions. Approximately 63 percent of Americans used nutritional trackers if they had gastrointestinal problems, 61 percent used mobile apps to contact their provider if they had weight problems, 50 percent would use medication reminders if they had pulmonary conditions, and 52 percent would track their sleep patterns if they had cardiovascular issues.
Dig Deeper
Diabetes Medication Adherence Cuts Costs by 4%, Boosts Outcomes
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Cost is a Primary Driver of Medication Non-Adherence Rates
The survey shows that Americans are also open to using wearable devices , with 79 percent indicating they wouldn’t mind using a wearable device for their healthcare.
Preferences for wearable devices were:
        Activity trackers (52 percent)
        Symptom trackers (45 percent)
        Personal health management (43 percent)
        Sleep trackers (41 percent) and
        Nutritional trackers (39 percent)
Utilizing the internet for healthcare advice is also becoming more common, with 91 percent of Americans indicating they would search online for information. Out of those that would use the internet, 58 percent would search for condition management information, 57 percent would search for symptom information and 55 percent would search for treatment information.
Consumers that were already diagnosed with a health condition were more likely to search for symptom information (41 percent), treatment options (26 percent) and specialty physicians (18 percent).
Millennials 25 percent more than their older peers trust resources developed or maintained by pharmaceutical companies. However, social media doesn’t garner as much support. Seventy-nine percent of polled individuals said they only trusted social media a little or they didn’t trust social media at all. Again, patients with chronic diseases differed from those without this type of diagnosis, and were more likely to trust social media sources.
People are seeking reliable healthcare sources, and according to the survey, are three times more likely to search for health information on WebMD than on government-based sites.
“It’s amazing that, almost 20 years after it launched, WebMD has become America’s doctor,” said Tom Bernthal, founder and CEO of Kelton. “Online searches are the new house call. This survey shows Americans aren’t relying exclusively on healthcare providers or the government for health information these days, underscoring the enormous opportunity for health news organizations and healthcare companies to become go-to sources.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPatient EngagementPopulation Health Management


