Clinical informatics becomes board-certified subspecialty

December 23, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 23, 2013 - While nurses have long dominated the burgeoning field of clinical informatics, they will be soon be gaining some valuable new partners among their physician colleagues.  The American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA) officially announced that the first physicians certified in the new subspecialty of clinical informatics have received their credentials, bringing healthcare organizations one step closer to the integration of patient care and patient data.
The American Board of Preventative Medicine and the American Board of Pathology administered their exams earlier this year after the subspecialty was approved by the American Board of Medical Specialties in 2011.  The certification is open to all physicians of any specialty, who can become eligible by demonstrating their practical informatics experience.  In the future, however, physicians will need to complete an informatics fellowship accredited by the Council on Graduate Medical Education.
“Clinical informatics has arrived, and I’m proud to be a part of the pioneer class of leaders in this field,” said William Hersh, MD, FACP, FACMI. “When you look at the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education’s definition of the informatics discipline, the operative word is ‘transform.’  Every day, informaticists are working in their healthcare settings to change how we do things, to improve patient care and population health.”
The shift to data-driven healthcare is creating an enormous demand for clinicians with EHR implementation skills and health information management expertise.  Informatics and health IT system design jobs now comprise 2.5% of all healthcare job openings, with nearly half of those listings asking candidates to streamline workflows and bring new products online.  Healthcare providers and vendors alike are desperate for informaticists, and the first crop of board certified physicians will have a wealth of opportunities to choose from.
Dig Deeper
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
Business Intelligence Tools Bring Insights to Organ Donation Network
Desire for Predictive Analytics Outpaces Hospital Investment
“We congratulate the newly certified leaders of the clinical informatics field, as they take their next step toward improving healthcare delivery,” said AMIA Incoming Board of Directors Chair Blackford Middleton, MD, MPH, MSc, FACMI. “These physicians have demonstrated that they understand the design and implementation of informatics systems, and are poised to integrate these solutions into their healthcare delivery organizations. It is illustrative of the ubiquitous need across our entire healthcare delivery system to engage with professionals who understand how to improve the value of care with informatics.”
  Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical InformaticsClinical IntelligenceEHR AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


