CMS Appoints Chief of Big Data for New Analytics Office

November 20, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
CMS has tapped Niall Brennan to lead its big data analytics efforts as head of the new Office of Enterprise Data and Analytics.
November 20, 2014 - The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) announced the creation of the Office of Enterprise Data and Analytics (OEDA) in an effort to focus on the benefits of big data analytics for the healthcare industry.  Niall Brennan will head up the new agency as the first Chief Data Officer (CDO).  Brennan will be responsible for helping CMS better harness its vast stores of internal and external data, including information that can be used to predict and identify financial fraud, analyze claims data in real-time, and support the population health management and quality initiatives of accountable care organizations (ACOs) and State Medicaid agencies.
“It’s clear how much data transparency will help the country improve outcomes, control costs and aid consumer decision making,” said CMS Principal Deputy Administrator Andy Slavitt in a press release. “This appointment signals to the industry that there is no turning back from the health care data agenda. Niall Brennan will help make sure CMS leads the way.”
Brennan moves to the new agency from his role as Acting Director of the Offices of Enterprise Management, where he has overseen research, analysis, and policy-making surrounding data analytics, e-health, business operations, and project management.  He has also served as Director of the Office of Information Products and Data Analytics and Deputy Director and Acting Director of the Policy and Data Analysis Group.  Before coming to CMS, he has held positions at the Brookings Institution, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC), and Congressional Budget Office.
Brennan’s long experience with data analytics and familiarity with CMS will no doubt help him to lead the agency through a time of widespread transition that requires a great deal of innovation.  Between the advancing stages of the EHR Incentive Programs, a host of clinical quality improvement measures, the expansion of health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act, and the general shift in the healthcare industry towards implementing and harnessing analytics technologies, the new office will have its hands full leading and managing a number of different large-scale efforts.
Dig Deeper
VA, CMS Announce Data Sharing, Fraud Prevention Partnership
State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
TGen Launches Discovery Platform to Boost Genomic Data Analysis
CMS has often been criticized for having a poor track record of data transparency.  A recent report from the Government Accountability Office (GAO) urged CMS to make a greater effort to provide consumers with data transparency, quality, and pricing tools that will help them make sound financial decisions.  CMS responded by acknowledging the need for more robust, public information, and the OEDA announcement provides further evidence that the agency is seeking to take its big data very seriously.
“Our commitment to transparency is matched by our commitment to keeping personal information safeguarded. We can’t expect to advance health outcomes unless we also ensure that our policies and practices around data privacy are leading the way,” Slavitt added. “We look forward to building on the success of recent releases, providing a clearer picture of the health care delivery system.”
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsHealthcare Data Analytics


