DeSalvo: Pressure, Optimism over EHR Data Interoperability

April 27, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 27, 2015 - Patients and providers alike are crying out for better access to information and a higher degree of EHR data interoperability, writes National Coordinator for Health IT Dr. Karen DeSalvo in a new blog post for Health Affairs, and the ONC is confident that the industry will soon achieve its goals.  Armed with important input from stakeholders across the care continuum and an EHR data interoperability plan that has “hit the mark,” DeSalvo believes health IT infrastructure can continue to be the lever that vaults the industry into a higher sphere of quality care, patient engagement, population health management, and health information exchange.
“One year ago, we called upon the health IT community to move beyond adoption and focus on interoperability, on unlocking the data, so it can be put to the many important uses demanded by consumers, doctors, hospitals, payers, and others who are part of the learning health system,” DeSalvo writes, echoing the sentiments expressed during her keynote address at HIMSS15 earlier in the month.
“ONC spent the year listening to the health IT community to understand the challenges and opportunities and developing strategic roadmaps to guide our way. Our goal was to evolve to be best able to lead where appropriate, and partner wherever possible, as we all shift the national strategic focus towards interoperability. I hope you all have felt that shift.”
After taking part in listening sessions and workgroups that highlighted the urgent need for easier, more complete, and more nuanced health information exchange capabilities, “I became increasingly optimistic as I heard how committed people were to seeing that we would leverage health IT to the advancement of everyone’s health,” DeSalvo says.  The ONC hopes to take the needs of individual communities into account as it plots its way forward into the next phases of EHR data interoperability, focusing not only on where the industry has to go, but how much progress it has made in the six short years since the HITECH Act came into being.
“The combined effort of the grant programs like the Regional Extension Centers, the ONC certification program and the Medicare and Medicaid EHR Incentive Programs brought us to a tipping point,” DeSalvo writes. While Stage 2 meaningful use got off to a shaky start, nearly all hospitals in the country have committed to some level of EHR technology, and physicians are not too far behind.   “Today, we know adoption is strong. It is such an accomplishment from just six years ago.”
READ MORE: As FHIR Matures, Healthcare Interoperability Comes into Focus
“Our nation’s success in adoption, and even the success we see in the increasingly widespread availability of exchange of health information, is just the beginning,” she continues. “To quote a member our advisory committee, the glass is indeed half full. But when you step back for perspective, it’s still a small glass. That means that we have much work to do to digitize the care experience across the entire care continuum, but also to see that we achieve true interoperability — not only exchange.”
Convincing providers to participate in health information exchange has been difficult enough, and the technology challenges of widespread EHR data interoperability are only part of the problem.  Providers must embrace new workflows, new reimbursement structures, and new care strategies that turn interoperability into a must-have competency if the industry is ever to see the real benefits of breaking down data silos for better population health management, clinical analytics, care coordination, and improved outcomes. 
In order to foster these new attitudes and provide a framework for achieving EHR data interoperability goals, the ONC has promoted its strategic roadmap, which DeSalvo believes provides “practical solutions that would work in the real world.”
The ONC’s three-pronged plan for health data interoperability includes the widespread adoption of data standards, including APIs, the establishment of a trust environment that puts patient data privacy and security at the forefront of action, and a sustainable method of incentivizing healthcare providers to engage in EHR data interoperability and “appropriate uses” of electronic health information.
“We intend to use all of the most impactful and appropriate tools in our toolbox and have called on the private sector and states to do the same,” DeSalvo states. “Congress is our partner; I am excited to see their interest in making sure that health data is available for consumers, and our doctors, when and where it matters most.”
READ MORE: ONC Views APIs as Key to Health Data Exchange, Interoperability
“I am optimistic because I am seeing collaboration like never before from the private sector — look at the Argonauts—the coalition of technologists and developers who are collaborating in an unprecedented fashion—who are accelerating the maturation of FHIR, to see that we have a safe, but highly usable new technology that stands to transform the health IT ecosystem.”
The industry needs these collaborative efforts to help develop a strong foundation of health IT infrastructure so that providers will have the tools they need to make more progress towards the Triple Aim, DeSalvo says.  “We know for a fact that unless we have the health information technology, including interoperability right, we will not bring payment reform or better care models like the medical home to scale,” she points out.
“As we act on this vision, we have an ongoing cadence of work ahead. We will need an unprecedented amount of cooperation, collaboration, and transparency to see that there is the best public private partnership possible,” she concludes. “We will build upon our strong foundation, using the tools and technologies in hand, systematically but with urgency. I am optimistic that together, we can reach our vision — that we are within reach of every American having access to their electronic health information when and where it matters most to them.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealth Information ExchangeInteroperability


