HIMSS14: Population health, clinical analytics are the future

March 04, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 04, 2014 - HIMMS14 isn’t just about vendors handing out souvenir pens or showing off their latest and greatest products to a sea of healthcare professionals with aching feet.  The massive conference, which attracted 37,000 attendees this year, is an excellent place to take the pulse of the healthcare industry and find out what’s hot and what’s worrying providers and innovators alike.  In Orlando this year, two big topics eclipsed even the ICD-10 transition: population health management and the clinical analytics infrastructure that will drive better care.
While a recent report by HIMSS Analytics indicated that infrastructure spending is taking a dip, providers who have spent the money and purchased the tools are increasingly seeking ways to leverage their investments.  However, this isn’t always as easy as it sounds.  ‘Population health management’ isn’t a term with clear parameters for many providers, each of whom have a unique patient mix, a unique budget, and a unique set of goals they want to achieve.
“You see the words ‘population health’ on nearly every booth here at HIMSS, but every one of them has a different opinion on what it is,” said Steve Fanning, Vice President of Healthcare Industry Strategy at Infor. “Infrastructure is critical, and analytics are critical, but what’s not there yet is the ability to engage patients and the ability to manage financial risk. That’s a missing ingredient from the population health approach.”

“With providers, there’s an increasing gap between the ‘haves’ and the ‘have nots,’” added Dan Riskin, MD, CEO of Health Fidelity.  “The’ haves’ are using an EHR; they have a data warehouse and initial analytics, and they are really well positioned to have better care than everyone else.  In a world where patients have choice, which I think is the new world after the Affordable Care Act, the better healthcare organizations will do better financially.”
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
Optum Risk Management Analytics Cut Opioid Use by 14%
Which Healthcare Data is Important for Population Health Management?
“So if you’re seeing a gap where some people have great analytics and increasingly spend money on that, they’re the ones who will get the patients – including the high value patients,” he continued.  “If you’re seeing some of the smaller organizations, some of the less well-funded ones, some of the less savvy ones, that said they needed to get their EHR to do reporting, but didn’t want to do anything else, didn’t want to improve outcomes or address their cost issues…those organizations will fall further and further behind due to their lack of infrastructure and lack of ability to do analytics.”
That willingness to grow and change with the shifting regulatory and consumer landscape will be a critical component for success in the coming years.  “You want to make sure that your practice has decided that it wants to change,” said Mark Wagar, President of Heritage Medical Systems, a Pioneer ACO recognized by CMS for its high level of achievement in a recent report.  “You may be doing the best that you can with the tools that you have, but you have to be a practice that’s not satisfied with the status quo.  You need to believe you can do more.”  The new landscape of healthcare is “not for practice that just says, ‘Well, I’ll sign up and I’ll get a bonus every year just doing what I’m doing.’”
As chronic diseases and the complex comorbidities of a growing Medicare-aged population consume more time and resources for providers, this willingness to adapt and be proactive when managing population health will be the key to seeing a return on investment in clinical analytics infrastructure.  “There are small populations that consume a huge amount of resources,” said Fanning.  “We’re talking about 5% of patients making up 40% of all spending.  Targeted programs that engage with those people will become very important.”
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsHIMSS14Patient DataPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


