How to Close Gaps between ACO Measure Sets, Clinical Practice

October 14, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 14, 2015 - Accountable care organizations may be all the rage among both public and private payers, but the quality measures used to gauge performance – and dole out shared savings and other reimbursement – are not always as complete, accurate, and meaningful as they might be. 
While healthcare organizations are continually encouraged to take a data-driven approach to providing coordinated care and population health management, a study published this month in the American Journal of Managed Care highlights the fact that many accountable care measure sets are mismatched with clinical guidelines, leaving worrisome gaps for providers who are doing their best to meet stringent quality benchmarks.
“Accountable care measure sets are tied to performance-based payment arrangements that reward providers for improving quality and avoiding waste,” explain the authors, who hail from Discern Health in Baltimore, the National Pharmaceutical Council, the American Medical Group Association, and The Brookings Institution.
“Waste includes underuse, which could lead to avoidable complications and costlier care overall, as well as overuse and misuse of resources,” they continued. “Measures are also important for balancing financial incentives. Program implementers can use measures to gauge the impact of accountable care reforms, which may be particularly important for high-cost conditions and treatments.”
These measures typically include benchmarks for chronic disease screenings and routine checkups, such as diabetic foot and eye exams, as well as care goals such as access to services, immunizations, follow-up strategies, and patient engagement.  Improvement is generally measured using historical benchmarks: organizations receive bonuses or shared savings payments if they cut a certain amount of financial spending or reach specific improvement thresholds.
READ MORE: ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
The design of these programs, including the popular Medicare Shared Savings Program (MSSP), has come under scrutiny after recent results indicate less-than-optimal financial return for many participants.  The use of historical benchmarks to chart performance has left initially high-performing organizations with little room to achieve vast improvements after joining the program, causing them to miss out on shared savings.
The AMJC study points out an additional flaw in many ACO programs: the metrics used to gauge performance do not always align with the real-life needs of patients, especially in populations that may be experiencing an unusually high proportion of a specific condition that falls outside the measure set’s purview.
To identify the gaps between typical measure sets and real world performance, the researchers chose twenty high-priority conditions, including those that are unusually prevalent, costly, or fatal to patients.  The list included many common illnesses, such as asthma, diabetes, hypertension, stroke, depression, and some cancers, as well as diseases such as hepatitis C, HIV, multiple sclerosis (MS), chronic kidney disease, and chronic low back pain, which often require specialty care.
Using a six-step process, the ream analyzed each condition to find gaps between commonly accepted clinical practice guidelines and accountable care measure sets from the MSSP and NCQA ACO Accreditation programs.  The researchers identified diagnostic and treatment goals for each condition, compared those goals with the measures in the ACO quality metric sets, flagged care goals that were not directly measured by ACO frameworks, and identified strategies to develop metrics that would address the missing pieces of patient care.
“Although treatment for some chronic diseases (diabetes, hypertension) were assessed in both sets by several process and fewer outcome measures, other conditions (MS, HIV) had no measures relevant to treatment or health outcomes,” the researchers found.
READ MORE: MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
However, they were able to identify some measures “that indirectly covered important aspects of care for a range of conditions simultaneously, such as certain CAHPS survey measures like functional status and communication, as well as wellness and prevention measures not included in the survey, including BMI screening, tobacco screening and follow-up, or immunizations.
Some of the potentially useful measures that fell outside of common ACO measure sets were process measures instead of outcome measures, which may limit their helpfulness.  “We also found aspects of care that are not assessed by any available measures, which represent opportunities for measure development,” the study adds.
“Gaps requiring development included measures of health risk assessment, monitoring for disease progression, and referrals to non-physician services such as physical or behavioral therapy.  For MS, we found no measures.”
In order to reduce some of these problematic findings, the study suggests that accountable care organizations take a “layered” approach to quality measurement.  “The layered approach reflects that accountable care systems use measures at multiple levels: for external accountability reporting at the population level, for internal management of performance at the system level, and for internal improvement at the provider level,” the study explains.
“The key to the layered approach is to ensure that the measures the system chooses for internal management and improvement map to the external accountability measure set. In this way, the layered approach allows for coordinated, focused, and flexible, yet comprehensive, measurement.”
READ MORE: Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Applications Close Sept. 15
As accountable care organizations become more widespread and an increasing proportion of the nation’s reimbursement dollars are tied to risk-sharing, shared savings, and value-based reimbursement, the importance of comprehensive measure sets cannot be undervalued, the study concludes.
Accountable care depends on having meaningful measures and efficient approaches to measurement,” the authors state. “Although data systems are improving, the cost of developing and using measures effectively remains significant.”
“To achieve success with new models of accountable care delivery and financing, the measurement strategies we have presented can help prioritize efforts to increase the benefit of measurement. To address widespread gaps in accountable care measure sets while limiting the burden of measurement, program implementers should use outcome, patient-reported, and cross-cutting measures and should promote development of those types of measures to fill gaps.”
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsBest PracticesClinical Quality Measures


