How Effective is mHealth for Chronic Disease Management?

March 04, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 04, 2015 - Care coordinators and population health managers are starting to develop a wide array of technology-based tools to help meet the growing demand for chronic disease management outside of the office walls. The rise of the smartphone may be the single most important development in the fight to ensure medication adherence, healthy lifestyle choices, and regular contact with the healthcare system.
From text message reminders to calorie counters and on-the-go access to patient portals, many of the strategies currently employed to keep patients on track would be impossible without mobile technology.
But how effective are current interventions that leverage these ubiquitous devices? A new study published this month in the Journal of Medical Internet Research (JMIR) argues that mHealth interventions for chronic disease management can have some impact on certain patients and conditions, but more work is needed to ensure that mHealth becomes more than a gimmick that soon fades from frustrated patients’ minds.
Anecdotally, mHealth seems like the perfect solution to the most expensive problem in healthcare. Pilots and programs in healthcare organizations have volunteered evidence that patients with chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, heart failure, and obesity show higher satisfaction, incur lower costs, and are hospitalized less frequently. While these interventions can be expensive for providers to implement, on the surface, the benefits seem to outweigh the negatives.
Dig Deeper
Using Health IT to Meet Medicaid Population Health, Socioeconomic Needs
CMS Revamps Team-Based Home Care Program for Elderly Patients
Communities Tackle Opioid Abuse with EHRs, Population Health
But mHealth interventions for chronic disease management must be well designed, comprehensive, easy to maintain, and encouraging for participants who likely won’t follow through with programs that don’t deliver clear and immediate value with minimal effort on their part. According to the JMIR study, led by researchers from the University of Washington, PATH, and the Group Health Research Institute in Seattle, these highly efficient programs are not as common as one might like.
In a review of more than 100 academic studies on mHealth and chronic disease, the researchers found that patient management programs most often relied on short messaging services, including text messages, to keep in contact with patients. While these programs generally produced high satisfaction scores from patients who appreciated the effort, the meaningful impact on behavioral changes and clinical measures were less universally positive.
Of the 27 studies that examined the impact of mHealth programs on patient adherence, just 56 percent saw an improvement. Forty-one studies observed the effect of mHealth management programs on direct clinical outcomes. Just 39 percent of those studies reported significant improvements in their intervention groups.
The researchers suggest that the body of academic studies to date may present a slightly skewed picture of mHealth’s effectiveness by focusing on just one of two important aspects of chronic disease management, or by being overly eager to promote a product, service, or pilot. Increasing patient adherence to their regimens is important, and may produce positive results in the short term, but measuring the clinical outcomes of this improved behavior is the key to measuring whether or not a chronic disease management program is truly worth the investment.
“While the growing popularity of mHealth is evident, its impact is not,” the study says. “Criticism of mHealth includes its implementation through small pilot initiatives that address a single disease or issue in service delivery, and a lack of globally accepted ways to evaluate effectiveness.”
Other reported negatives to using smartphones and tablets for chronic disease management include patient confusion over the design and use of apps, and difficulty using the necessary hardware. For low-income patients, who often suffer disproportionately from chronic disease, the cost of purchasing and maintaining a smartphone can be prohibitive.
On the provider side, clinicians voiced common concerns over the impact of adding more data and more steps to their workflows. Physicians worried about the costs of implementing programs on their end, and did not always see clear benefits for patient care. The relatively low number of studies that indicated positive return on the investment of time and money may lend credence to these concerns.
“The evidence presented here indicates that while the potential for mAdherence tools is high, their implementation and execution are mixed,” the study concludes. mHealth is a relatively new phenomena, and its impact on the skyrocketing rate of chronic diseases must be carefully studied in the future to develop best practices for the design and implementation of effective management programs.
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementmHealth


