Can an iPod reduce preventable readmissions by 15 percent?

October 15, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 15, 2013 - In order to reduce spending associated with preventable 30-day readmissions, hospitals are getting creative.  From home monitoring robots that bring nurses to the beside to strapping FitBits around the ankles of cardiac patients to keep them moving, the use of innovative strategies to increase overall wellness before and after discharge is becoming ever more vital to hospitals on the hook for big readmissions penalties.  At Cullman Regional Medical Center in Cullman, Alabama, a cheap, popular, and familiar gadget is helping patients understand their discharge instructions to keep them healthier at home.
In October of 2011, nurses at CRMC started dictating discharge instructions into an iPod as part of a pilot program using Vocera’s Good to Go software, which allows providers to choose a template based on a patient’s condition, then record voice, add pictures, documents, and other materials, and track how often the information was accessed by the patient after discharge.
For patients with chronic diseases, regular follow-up care is crucial for presenting relapses, but patients often forget their instructions during the stress of leaving the hospital, returning home, and caring for surgical sites or other issues.  Patients could listen to their instructions with a smartphone or computer at any time to remind themselves of their responsibilities.
“We utilize this system for a multi-disciplinary approach to help better inform our patients and help them understand if they possibly forget something when they get home. They can log on the internet or can phone in and listen to this information as many times as they need,” says Cheryl Bailey, RN, chief nursing officer of CRMC.  “I keep two or three of these devices in each nursing unit. We have an ADT feed that comes from our electronic medical record (EMR) into the solution, and when the nurse logs on with her secure password and pin, she’ll choose the patients name, which is loaded in there. And this is all cloud-based technology, so nothing is residing on the iPod device. It’s all HIPAA-regulated.”
Dig Deeper
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Preventable Hospital Readmissions Fall Dramatically Across US
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
Patients accessed the information between 50% and 80% of the time, Bailey says, and 30% of patients listened to the recording more than once.  As a result, 30-day readmissions dropped 15% while driving patient satisfaction numbers sky high.  Having records of the instructions also improved internal quality control, since a supervisor could listen to how thoroughly a nurse dictated details to a patient and ensure that proper communication was taking place.
These little steps can add up to big savings.  By increasing medication adherence, for example, by clearly stating when prescriptions should be taken and refilled, healthcare can start to tackle the $300 billion per year spent due to improper use of medications.  As providers start to identify and manage populations as a whole, proper education and proactive outreach about medications or follow-ups after surgery will become increasingly important for keeping readmissions low.
Recording the information also signaled to patients that it was important, Bailey says.  “They are just ready to get home, not listening to what we’re saying. Now, we are finding that most patients do comply and go back and re-listen to the instructions. When it’s over, the nurse encourages the patient to log on and ask any follow-up questions, too. Listening to it immediately helps with that comprehension, since we flood patients with information. To be honest, it’s hard to remember everything, and this system really helps with that.”
  Tagged Clinical DataEHR Patient DataHospital ReadmissionsPatient CarePopulation Health Management


