Cleveland Clinic Sets Up New Biobank for Clinical, Genomic Research

May 25, 2018

By Jessica Kent
May 25, 2018 - Cleveland Clinic and Brooks Automation have announced a new biobank facility to enhance research on human tissue samples and improve clinical care for several conditions, including cancer, heart disease, and epilepsy.
"This new biorepository will be a critical resource for our scientists. The ability to properly manage biological specimens and to compare diseased tissues side-by-side with healthy tissues is essential to understanding the biological basis of a disease," said Serpil Erzurum, MD, Chair of Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute.
"As a leading healthcare organization, this provides an unparalleled opportunity to advance understanding of many different diseases, enabling us to make discoveries that are directly benefiting our patients."
Dig Deeper
EHR, Biobank Data Uncovers Genetics of Personalized Medicine
How Advanced Genomics, Big Data Will Enable Precision Medicine
Can Next-Gen Genomics Ease the Precision Medicine Bottleneck?
Brooks Life Sciences, a division of Brooks Automation, will manage the onsite operations of the biobanking facility, including safely storing and maintaining valuable collections of biological material.
Brooks Life Sciences will begin with the launch of a sample inventory process that will annotate each genetic sample within the storage facility before moving material to the new biobanking facility.
This project will build on Cleveland Clinic’s existing biobanking capacity, which includes the Genomic Medicine Biorepository (GMB), a full-service processing and banking laboratory that was established in 2005.
The new biorepository is anticipated to streamline patient consent processes, centralize storage, and accelerate translational research. It will be located on Cleveland Clinic’s campus and is anticipated to be completed in summer 2019.
"With an international reputation as a leader in medical research, Cleveland Clinic understands the value sample management plays in medical research and is committed to improving patient outcomes," said Brooks Life Sciences President Dusty Tenney.
"We are extremely proud to be partnering with Cleveland Clinic to manage the operations of its new biobank."
Tagged Clinical Data RepositoryGenomicsMedical ResearchPatient OutcomesPersonalized Medicine


