Healthcare Quality, Cost Data Websites Fall Short for Consumers

November 20, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
The suite of CMS Compare websites lacks meaningful healthcare quality and cost information for Medicare patients, GAO states in a new report.
November 20, 2014 - CMS could be doing a better job in presenting healthcare quality and cost data to Medicare beneficiaries, says a report by the Government Accountability Office (GAO), by closing significant gaps in the data sets on its transparency websites.  While CMS has been making some efforts to provide a deeper look into the performance of healthcare organizations, the GAO report asserts that providers, not consumers, have been top of mind during the construction of the tools, which lack basic features like calculators for out-of-pocket patient costs and an easy way to display and compare provider data.
CMS runs five quality comparison websites, including Nursing Home Compare, Dialysis Facility Compare, Home Health Compare, Hospital Compare and Physician Compare, which attempt to give patients a way to learn more about the services and providers they are selecting.  However, GAO calls the data “limited in their provision of relevant and understandable cost and quality information for consumers.”
The Physician Compare website, for example, allows users to see whether a physician is participating in the EHR Incentive Programs and other CMS initiatives, states the physician’s practice location, medical school of record, and board certifications, but currently provides little else.  Nursing Home Compare, on the other hand, recently received a facelift that included five-star ratings for health inspections, staffing levels, and quality measures.  Hospital Compare is set to receive the same system, CMS announced over the summer, and the feature will expand to the other websites in the future.
But the websites still lack the ability for consumers to create customized views of information, and there is no information on how much patients will pay out-of-pocket for common procedures. “As consumers are asked to pay more for their care, they run the risk of obtaining care from high-cost providers without receiving the highest quality care,” the report says. “Therefore, consumers have an increased need for transparent information on cost and quality before they receive care, so they can make informed decisions when choosing treatments and providers. Even when not faced with these decisions, consumers can use such information to better anticipate and plan for expenses. “
Dig Deeper
EHR Usability Shortfalls May Up Pediatric Patient Safety Risks
Big Data Analytics Fuels Penn State Precision Health Research
Data Warehouse, ERP Tools Top Wish List for Value-Based Care
“Together, information on both cost and quality enables consumers to assess the value of health care services, for example by comparing costs within a group of providers determined to be of high quality,” it continues. “Research suggests that this transparent information is most relevant for services that can be planned in advance, so consumers have time to consider it. We have previously found that this transparent information on cost and quality is difficult for consumers to obtain, and that the information that is available is not always meaningful to consumers.”
HHS has concurred with the GAO’s recommendations to provide data on out-of-pocket expenses and notes that it has released some pricing data that allows users to view and compare average hospital charges for certain services.  But the shift to pay-for-performance reimbursements and the possibility for patients to have overlapping insurance coverage makes it hard to provide meaningful data.  “It is difficult to provide out-of-pocket estimates because HHS does not have access to information on what beneficiaries would pay if they have coverage other than or in addition to the traditional fee-for-service program,” HHS said in its response to the report.
Improving data transparency to allow patients to make the best possible choices for their care is an ongoing process that CMS is committed to pursuing, the comments conclude, but GAO continues to urge CMS to keep consumers in mind during the much-needed upgrades to its public pricing and quality data. “Until CMS establishes such procedures and performance metrics with respect to implementing their goals for promoting health care transparency,” the report states, “the agency is likely to continue to have limited effectiveness in conveying relevant and understandable information on cost and quality to consumers.”
Tagged Healthcare Business IntelligencePatient DataQuality Of Care


