Three reasons to be thankful for healthcare analytics this year

November 22, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 22, 2013 - As the nights draw in and the pantry starts filling up with boxes of stuffing mix, cans of cranberry sauce, and disposable roasting pans, people start thinking about only one thing.  Christmas presents.
But before the jingle bells start competing for your attention with the EHR alarms and the dulcet tones of mHealth games, Thanksgiving allows us a chance to pause and reflect on the changes over the past year.  For many hospitals, physician practices, and research organizations, this means being grateful for enhanced clinical decision support, population health management, better business sense, and improved outcomes for patients.  Here are three reasons why you should stop and say thanks for healthcare analytics before you dive into your mashed potatoes.
Smart data makes everyone smarter
What’s the number one rule of health IT?  Love your data and it will love you back.  While the process of crafting an analytics infrastructure takes time, money, and a little bit of magic, the results can be spectacular.  From changing the lives of children to alerting physicians to deadly diseases long before they have a chance to manifest to the naked eye, analytics is a whole lot more than pie-in-the-sky PowerPoint buzzwords.
There are real things happening for real clinicians and real patients, and it’s hard not to get excited about the enormous potential we’re just beginning to explore.  With all the regulatory changes and financial constraints that make practicing medicine a chore, it’s important to remember that these are just growing pains.  There are amazing things on the horizon for healthcare, and everyone who works in a hospital or clinic today gets to be part of it.
READ MORE: $240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Informaticists are really nice people
I hate to generalize or anything, but every health information manager, clinical informaticist, registered nurse EHR wrangler, and ICD-10 wizard I’ve ever had the privilege to speak to has been shockingly intelligent, warmly good natured, and dedicated to one thing and one thing alone: making his or her organization the best it can possibly be through applying data science to the art of patient care.
With decades of clinical experience and a good dose of computer know-how, these informatics professionals do so much more than fill out boxes on spreadsheets.  Clinicians may not always be happy with their EHRs, and they may not always understand mandates like ICD-10 and meaningful use.  But with an HIM pro or clinical improvement specialist roaming the halls, they have a partner helping them to make it work.  Show your appreciation for their efforts and get them a gift they’ll really enjoy this year.
Saving money for your hospital means a bigger holiday party
Let’s be honest for a second.  While it takes a lot of selflessness and compassion to be a physician or a nurse, few people in any profession are wholly altruistic 100% of the time.  When asked to change nearly everything about the way they have been trained to work since med school, it’s reasonable for clinicians to ask what’s in it for them.  The answer?  Well, you’re only going to get a paycheck if you doing things the way the board room wants.
READ MORE: Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
But besides that, there are good reasons to make the changes necessary to integrate analytics and other health IT into the daily grind.  The simple fact is that analytics can save money for the hospital, for patients, for payers, and for the nation as a whole.  How is that not great?  The marriage of clinical and financial data opens up incredible possibilities for rescuing healthcare from the mire of inefficient, wasteful spending that has made America a less than perfect place.
And if the big picture doesn’t do it for you, think about how many more pizzas you can order for the big holiday bash if there’s a little wiggle room in the budget.  $213 billion just by watching your prescribing habits?  Guys, that’s a whole lot of pizza.
So as you sit down with your family and friends this season, be thankful for the data in your life.  The world of healthcare information technology might not be perfected quite yet, and we may have a long way to go.  But just think: without the industry-wide emphasis on data integrity and health IT reform, you wouldn’t have nine ways to describe how your Thanksgiving turkey landed you in the hospital.
  Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig DataClinical AnalyticsFinancial AnalyticsHealthcare Business Intelligence


