AMA’s Major Challenges: Chronic Disease Management, ICD-10, MU

June 08, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 08, 2015 - The dual burdens of chronic disease management on patients and cumbersome regulation on providers are some of the primary challenges that need to be quickly and thoroughly addressed in the coming year, said outgoing American Medical Association President Dr. Robert M. Wah during the AMA’s annual meeting on June 6 in Chicago. 
Despite achieving the significant victory of seeing the sustainable growth rate (SGR) abolished in April, the AMA seeks continued relief from federal mandates like meaningful use and ICD-10 that are placing a problematic financial and administrative onus on vulnerable healthcare providers.
Continuing his reliance on sci-fi movie metaphors to draw parallels to the state of the healthcare system, Wah uses “Back to the Future 2” as a way to show just how much – and how little – of a difference technology has made in the everyday lives of consumers.  
Joking about the continually delayed promise of hoverboards and the prevalence of “futuristic” devices like smartphones and wearables, Wah points out that 2015 hasn’t yet delivered on all the promises envisioned by screenplay writers in 1989.
“In looking at what ‘Back to the Future 2’ got right and got wrong about 2015, its biggest blunder might be the widespread use of fax machines,” Wah says. “In one scene, Marty and Doc pass a Post Office mailbox that includes a computer terminal that says ‘Fax here.’  This gets a laugh – unless you work in a practice that's still faxing paper records back and forth because their electronic records can't interact – can't interoperate – with outside systems.”
READ MORE: Optum Risk Management Analytics Cut Opioid Use by 14%
The AMA hopes that the industry’s ability to achieve meaningful EHR interoperability is somewhat less mythical than the technology behind the flux capacitor, and “strongly supports” the implementation and use of EHRs and other health IT infrastructure to improve quality, patient safety, and population health management.  But current regulatory frameworks like the EHR Incentive Programs aren’t doing enough to help providers achieve their goals, Wah said, when they include provisions that are too difficult to meet.
“While AMA and the broader physician community strongly support the use of technology and innovation to improve the health of our patients, the Meaningful Use requirements for electronic records are a heavy burden and a prison for innovation,” he stated. “For a better future, EHRs need to be interoperable, encourage physician-patient interaction, streamline workload and payment and promote team care and coordination.”
Wah applauded CMS and the ONC for reducing the year-long reporting period in Stage 2 to just 90 days, and for proposing to slash the 5 percent patient engagement threshold down to just one patient. “It's a start, but I've said it before: Harness technology to improve care – don't let it harness us,” he urged.  “The same goes for those who write regulations. Learn from mistakes and act accordingly. If something isn't working – fix it.”
ICD-10 is a similar regulatory misstep, the AMA said, which may be a “catastrophic disruption” to physicians if the lower-than-average claims acceptance rates produced by CMS’ end-to-end testing weeks are replicated at scale.  “We'll continue to press for more comprehensive testing, a grace period to reduce potential claims denials, hardship exemptions, and advanced payment authority to head off cash flow problems,” Wah said.
The AMA is also channeling its fighting instincts towards more positive patient outcomes and smarter chronic disease management strategies in an effort to tackle diabetes and cardiovascular disease, Wah continued.  Through increased patient engagement, mHealth, team-based care coordination, and data-driven population health management, providers are delivering better care to high-risk patients while focusing on prevention and wellness to reduce unnecessary spending.
READ MORE: Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
“Our work is getting results, most recently with our new partnership with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Prevent Diabetes STAT: Screen, Test, Act—Today,” Wah explained, referencing the chronic disease management program, unveiled in March, that hopes to educate providers and patients about the diagnosis and impact of pre-diabetes and Type 2 diabetes.  “It helps physicians tap prevention programs in their communities or online – and drew from our pilot with 11 practice sites in four states in Delaware, Florida, Indiana and Minnesota."
“In the 2015 of Back to the Future, Doc got a new spleen and a rebuilt colon at a rejuvenation clinic. We're addressing a reality today where our efforts can prevent deadly outcomes from diabetes and cardiovascular disease. And that means a better, healthier future.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsMeaningful UsePopulation Health Management


