Why are hospitals data rich but lacking in data analytics?

October 03, 2013

By Kyle Murphy, PhD
October 03, 2013 - As part of the interview with Health Revenue Assurance Holdings (HRAA) on the subject of ICD-10, the company’s CEO and Chairman Andrea Clark touched on the value of data analytics in healthcare for both short- and long-term goals, particularly those aspects of healthcare reform focused on managing costs more effectively.  The usefulness of healthcare analytics for achieving compliance with ICD-10 on Oct. 1, 2014, could very well become a jumping-off point for making this analysis an ongoing part of improving care delivery.
“Even beyond ICD-10, once we get to October 1 data analytics and the ICD-10 data starting this train is going to move us into better decisions of quality of care of patients, decreasing the cost of healthcare, so we want to look beyond ICD-10 codes,” says Clark. “Where is this going to take us in the future with dashboards, data analytics, analyzing departments and clinical outcomes?”
From her experience working in the industry, Clark confirms that those healthcare organizations already seeing the benefits of healthcare analytics tend to be of the larger and more resourceful variety as well as those already participating in forms of accountable care such as accountable care organizations (ACOs) and patient-centered medical homes (PCMHs).
“I see it more so in large hospital systems starting to integrate between the hospital, the physician, and the financials and moving toward that ACO,” she explains. “But when you talk to hospitals that are siloed out there by themselves for the community, it’s eye-opening for them when we begin to talk about the analytics and what that can do for them for the future.”
Dig Deeper
Duke Health Achieves Stage 7 Maturity Score from HIMSS Analytics
Penn Med. Population Health Analytics Dashboard Wins ECRI Prize
Desire for Predictive Analytics Outpaces Hospital Investment
As Clark observes, hospitals in general have a wealth of data already within their rich. In fact, they’re sitting on it. The problem for these organizations is their being unable to access this information in a convenient way. The problem of data siloes in healthcare, therefore, isn’t just a problem for health information exchange. It is also a problem for healthcare analytics.
“Hospitals are data rich and what is indicated and what I see in the hospital setting is that their data is all siloed and they don’t know how to integrate it,” she continues. “And with other initiatives such as meaningful use and EHRs and the RAC is still out there, their IT departments cannot get to the data fast enough to pull it together.”
What needs to occur at these healthcare organizations is for leadership to push the thinking about data analytics forward. “They know they have data but they don’t know how to pull it together, and many times departments don’t think out of the box to say, ‘We can grab it from over here and we can grab it from over there and bring it all together into a dashboard.’ That thinking process is still stalled,” she adds.
As Clark notes, the healthcare industry has only begun scratching the surface of data analytics. “Healthcare is just starting to identify with it and embrace it, and it seems more from a standpoint of research and device companies and ACOs — very high-level types of industry in healthcare.” However, that shouldn’t stop hospital leadership, both inside and outside the clinical environment, from taking a closing look at the possibilities.
Tagged Accountable Care OrganizationsApplied AnalyticsBig Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsHealth Information ManagementHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Data ManagementPredictive Analytics


