Q&A: Unstructured clinical notes just as valuable for analytics

October 10, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 10, 2013 - While much has been made of the need to standardize clinical data with EHRs that use templates, click boxes, and dropdowns to funnel information into pre-determined data elements, the need for such strict organization may not be top priority for long.  Advances in natural language processing of clinical documentation mean that physicians can say what they want without excluding narrative text from analytics.  Juergen Fritsch, Chief Scientist at M*Modal, sat down with HealthITAnalytics to discuss how to extract the value from unstructured data in the pursuit of better patient care.
What are some of the challenges when using clinical documentation for analytics?
Traditionally, people have relied on using structured documentation to enable analytics.  They’ve designed their documentation forms to capture the data that they wanted for analytics.  So it started with patient demographics and it went from there to medications and allergies and things like that, so they could then use that structured data to analyze the patient population.
But I think more recently, people found that every time there are new requirements or new needs, you have to redesign your forms.  You have to add things, you have to modify it, and it’s just this never ending story.  You’re always chasing the perfect form, and you never get there because there’s always a change in what you’re looking for from an analytics perspective.
So more and more organizations are looking for better ways to deal with that.  One of the ways that we’re working on is to allow people to narrate patient information rather than capture it in a structured form.  Then the advantage becomes that they can really describe it in their own words.  They’re not limited to what’s in the form, and they’re not limited to analytics on those structured data elements.  You can have a wide open field as to what you can analyze with narrative text using NLP technologies. That shift is happening right now, from that pure structured analytics to a mix of structured and unstructured analytics to really tap into the richer physician narrative.
How does it work?
There are quite a lot of tools out there that don’t require structured data.  You can do it right off of what you have.  What people typically do is use natural language processing to parse the unstructured text blobs and identify key data elements: medications, allergies, problems, procedures, etc.  We can extract them out of the narrative and plug them in with the structured data elements.  And then we can go back to the traditional form of doing analytics on the structured data elements.
But then more recently, there’s this trend towards leaving it in the narrative and doing analytics on demand.  You ask a question – you don’t know ahead of time what that question is.  Let’s say someone wants to identify patients with congestive heart failure.  So now you go into the text and find specific information about heart failure patients.  That’s what’s called dynamic adaptive analytics.  It’s become more and more interesting lately.
Where is the value in this type of analytics?
The people who use this are mostly researchers or case workers who manage patients on a longitudinal framework that need to know which patients are at risk and need to follow up with an exam, or something like that.  In the context of ACOs, we see that happening more and more where they have dedicated staff in the hospital that just does analytics to identify the patients at risk.
Where it creates value and where it becomes important is when they get insights that they wouldn’t have otherwise.  We’re starting to use analytics more broadly and more widely, not just on structured data but really across all the clinical documentation.  They should be able to get better insights into their patient population and be able to see where the five patients with heart failure are, or the ones who are at risk of hospitalization, or have recently been discharged to make sure they don’t come back in three months again.
How can analytics benefit the long-term goals of healthcare reform?
In this whole accountable care and longer-term thinking, making sure patients stay healthy and stay out of the hospital – as that shift occurs, then analytical capabilities become even more important.  It’s interesting to see how some of the early successes we’ve seen with accountable care organizations, like the Pioneer ACO program – it’s amazing to see that they haven’t really been using any analytics technology.  They haven’t been using health IT.
They’ve purely relied on good old management skills: identifying patients and then having a staff of nurses calling all the patients and making sure they come into the hospital.  That’s been the driver for the success.  So imagine how much more success we’re going to see when they really start to adopt analytics capabilities and really start looking into using technology to stratify their patients and really find the patients that they need to focus on.
It’s also good for the physicians, I think, because at the time that the patient comes in, they can be more informed.  They can see all the things that have happened to the patient elsewhere and in the last three or four years, so they can make better decisions about what to do with the patient.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataClinical AnalyticsClinical DataHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Data Mining


