PA health system gets $1M to improve cardiac disease management

March 25, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 25, 2014 - The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has awarded $1 million in grant funding to Allegheny General Hospital to researchers interested in finding methods to better control pulmonary arterial hypertension and other conditions.  Raymond L. Benza, MD, Director of the Advanced Heart Failure, Transplantation, Mechanical Circulatory Support and Pulmonary Hypertension Program received the largest share of the grant money, and has been awarded $868,000 for a research proposal focused on testing a specific cardiac monitoring system.
“Pulmonary arterial hypertension is a life-threatening condition with no cure,” Benza said. “We’re very pleased to be able to devote significant resources to clinical trials designed to zero in on better ways to manage the condition to extend life and improve quality of life for our patients.”
Benza and his team hope to use the CardioMEMS pulmonary artery hemodynamic monitoring system in conjunction with cardiac MRIs to understand and manage the condition, which leads to a narrowing of the arteries that help supply blood to the lungs.  The CardioMEMS system is a wireless, implantable device that provides statistics to physicians remotely.
“If validated, this approach would be preferable to the typical, more invasive, approach of repetitive cardiac catheterizations,” added co-investigator Dr. Biederman, Director of AGH’s Cardiac MRI Center. “A non-invasive approach that facilitates earlier therapeutic intervention can lead to wholesale changes in the manner in which PAH patients are treated and result in fewer hospitalizations and deaths.”
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
CMS Proposes Coverage for Next-Gen Precision Medicine Test
Srinivas Murali, MD, and Manreet Kanwar, MD, also received funding from the NIH through a Small Business Technology Transfer grant, which provides $150,000 to test a clinical decision support tool designed to assess if patients with advanced heart failure are eligible for a left ventricular assist device (LVAD).
“Current risk stratification tools are simply inadequate in predicting outcomes reliably in patients receiving LVAD therapy,” said Kanwar. “We need better tools to help clinicians make the best possible use of potentially life-saving technology while providing cost-effective care.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsBig DataClinical AnalyticsClinical DataClinical IntelligenceMedical ResearchPatient Data


