State Innovation Plans Focus on Population Health Management

December 31, 2014

By Stephanie Reardon
States awarded in round two for State Innovation Testing Models.
December 31, 2014 - The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) announced that 11 states have been awarded Model Test awards in round two of the State Innovation Testing Models. The states being awarded in round two are Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Idaho, Iowa, Michigan, New York, Rhode Island, Ohio, Tennessee, and Washington. The focuses in many of these 11 state’s healthcare innovation plans seem to be on population health.
Colorado’s innovation, “The Colorado Framework”, intends to form a system that will complete proposals for statewide enrichment of population health. The state’s plan will also create a network of public health supports and clinics. The state will utilize its CMS-granted award fund of up to $65 million to put its ideas into place and test its effectiveness.
In Connecticut, their  first goal is to make an improvement in population health. The state’s plan indicates that the state wants to install prevention service centers to focus on improving population health.
The CMS awarded Connecticut $45 million to instate and evaluate its state healthcare innovation plan. Connecticut’s goals also include bolstering primary care, and encouraging the use of a value-based payment and insurance programs.
Dig Deeper
Kaiser Permanente Program Reduces Cardiovascular Disease Risks
Top 5 Collaborative Tasks for Population Management, Public Health
Population Health Cuts Native American Kidney Disease by 54%
Delaware’s Healthcare innovation plan includes a goal to improve population health through community programs. Delaware’s healthcare innovation plan will also include the development of patient-engagement tools that provide price and quality transparency. The CMS granted Delaware $35 million to instate and evaluate its plan.
Michigan’s healthcare innovation plan will include Community Health Innovation Regions (CHIRs), which are partnerships that tackle population health problems and guides patients to community services relevant to their needs. Michigan outlines it as a data gathering process to determine if the CHIRs can provide higher-quality healthcare for less of an expense while working with Michigan’s soon-to-be created Accountable Systems of Care.
The CMS granted Michigan approximately $70 million to put its healthcare changes into place. Michigan intends to use this funding to provide data analytics and other resources to medical facilities throughout the state.
The implementation of an Advanced Primary Care (APC) tiered primary care model is part of New York’s healthcare innovation goals. This model will be integrated with population health through public health consultants working with population health improvement contractors funded by the CMS’s grant of approximately $99.9 million in award funds.
Rhode Island’s new healthcare operations intends to put a population health plan in place. The health plan will be formulated around the data results of community health assessments. The State also aims to utilize data management and analytics. The CMS has granted Rhode Island up to $20 million in award funds to establish and examine these changes.
Instead of a population health focus, analytics and interoperability is included within the State of Washington’s Healthcare innovation Plan. However, residential health is still a focus according to a press release from Jay Inslee, Governor of the State of Washington .
“Our goal is to help Washington’s seven million residents lead healthier lives and access the best quality health care at the best price,” Inslee said. “This plan for a Healthier Washington is one way we can support people in all areas of the state to improve their health and catalyze the changes needed to transform our health care.”
Tagged Population HealthPopulation Health Management


