Hospitalizations for heart failure, stroke drop by a third

August 19, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 19, 2014 - Hospitalizations related to congestive heart failure and ischemic stroke have dropped by nearly a third over the past ten years, says the American Heart Association, due mostly to advances in population health management, preventative care, coordinated treatment, and clinical analytics.  Hospitalizations for unstable angina were cut by a remarkable 83.8% in just a decade.  The risk of death from heart failure and stroke have plunged by 13 percent, while mortality from unstable angina dropped by 21 percent and heart attack deaths were reduced by nearly a quarter.
“Interestingly, these improvements happened in a period when there were no real ‘miracle’ clinical advancements,” said Harlan Krumholz, MD, SM, Director of the Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation at Yale-New Haven Hospital and lead author of the massive study, which examined nearly 34 million Medicare patients who received treatment from 1999 to 2011. “Rather, we saw consistent improvements in the use of evidence-based treatments and medications and an increase in quality improvement initiatives using registries and other data to track performance and support improvement efforts — as well as a strong emphasis on heart-healthy lifestyles and behaviors.”
“Huge strides in lifestyle, quality of care and prevention strategies for cardiovascular health have seemed to have a ripple effect on saving lives,” Krumholz stressed. “As a result, our country has undergone remarkable changes, which has reduced suffering and costs. There is still more work to do as heart disease and stroke combined remain the leading cause of death and disability, but this study documents astonishing progress and national achievement.”
The findings are similar to an unrelated study from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health that highlighted a 24% decline in the number of first-time strokes and a 20% decline in deaths from stroke over the past two decades.  That study also attributed the gains to better population health and preventative care techniques.
Dig Deeper
NH Population Health Management Program Cuts Overdoses by 34%
LA Housing Program Improves Mental Health, Cuts Hospital Costs
CMS Revamps Team-Based Home Care Program for Elderly Patients
The Centers for Disease Control released a data brief in May flagging the importance of population health management in the fight against premature mortality, noting that 258,000 deaths per year, many of which are related to heart disease and stroke, could be prevented with more coordinated, comprehensive care.  “Examining which diseases and injuries result in the greatest number of deaths in populations, particularly for deaths that occur earlier than expected, allows health officials to establish disease prevention goals, priorities, and strategies,” the report says.  “Reducing the number of earlier than expected deaths from the leading causes of death requires risk factor reduction, screening, early intervention, and successful treatment of the disease or injury.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


