Healthcare analytics essentials: The master patient index

November 20, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 20, 2013 - As we start entering the season for snowballs, it seems appropriate to talk about the rapidly escalating problems that can hurtle out of control from a single misplaced keystroke during patient registration at a hospital or clinic.  While it might seem like nothing more than a minor inconvenience to mistake a Ron for a Rob, it can have serious consequences not only for patient care, but for the quality of data used for analytics down the line.
While the use of the master patient index (MPI) is intended to eliminate duplicate files and near-matches, the truth is that such a system needs constant vigilance and maintenance from the HIM department in order to function properly.  What are the essential building blocks for a workable MPI, and how important is it to have one?
Many vendors offer software packages to create a plug-and-play MPI for providers.  However, it’s important to know what you’re looking for before you purchase.  The basic data that needs to be collected for each patient is familiar to anyone who has ever filled out a form: full name, date of birth, social security number, address, and gender.  Hospitals will often add admission and discharge information, insurance information, the type of service performed, and the admitting or attending physician’s name.
A manual MPI based on index cards or paper files may be easier to check for duplicates, but an electronic index is vital for hospitals that are using EHRs or that intend to perform analytics based on demographics and clinical information.  It is also essential for health information exchange, which requires the extra step of making each facility’s proprietary record identification number mesh with the rest of the exchange’s participants.  As more organizations join an HIE, and as regional HIEs join up with larger initiatives, the chances that a patient’s record is lost or misidentified grows with each new link to the chain.
AHIMA notes that the five greatest risks to data integrity are relying on weak patient matching algorithms to produce search results, failing to include HIM staff in the creation of these algorithms, failure to implement an ongoing maintenance program, a lack of standard interfaces and processes, and weak governance principles to prevent bad data from polluting the system.  Successful organizations often have the HIM department check for duplicates on a daily or weekly basis to prevent mistakes before they reach untenable proportions.  Automating data mapping and integrity audits can also help flag questionable results.
READ MORE: HIM Pros Must Shift from Coding to Health Informatics, Analytics
In the absence of a national patient identifier, each provider tends to have its own way of assigning a unique alphanumeric record number to an individual.  At registration and intake, an administrative staff member can type in the name or date of birth of a patient to look up his file.  But if the staff member makes a typo, the search record could come up blank.  The creation of a new patient file at this point will produce an erroneous duplicate.  The patient may be asked to reproduce files from other providers or fill out demographic paperwork again, which negatively affects both the quality of their record and the quality of their experience.
Inappropriately merged records are just as dangerous as duplicates, notes Amy Landry of HealthInfoNet, Maine’s only state HIE. “[We use] first and last name, date of birth, address, SSN, and then medical record number from the actual facility, and it has to be a confident enough match for it automatically merge those records,” she explains.  “If it’s not a confident match, it will kick it out.  We have someone here who reaches out to the facility and tries to work with that to make sure that we’re not merging patients who shouldn’t be merged, or leaving them separate if they shouldn’t be separate.  It’s pretty accurate.  It’s up in the high nineties.”
Without a clear picture of what patients are in the system and how they move throughout the healthcare continuum, health information exchange and subsequent analytics will be impossible at a larger level.  Providers must build a foundation of clean, reliable patient index data in order to advance their capabilities in the future as well as provide quality care.  The master patient index is the key starting point for providers to build a data infrastructure that accurately captures the basics, enabling further exploration of analytics capabilities and accurate treatment in the future.
  Tagged Data CaptureData StorageHealth Information ManagementHealthcare Analytics


