Mostashari raises $4.5M for new accountable care startup

June 19, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 19, 2014 - Former ONC chief Dr. Farzad Mostashari is hoping to encourage the formation of accountable care organizations (ACOs) by hiring out his health IT expertise to physicians through a new startup company called Aledade.  With $4.5 million of investment capital already in the bank, Mostashari’s venture hopes to use a membership-style system to help physicians set up an ACO with no upfront costs by taking a 40% cut from any savings the organization achieves.
“This is good for patients who will find that their trusted primary care doctors are more available and better informed than ever before,” Mostashari wrote in a blog post announcing the company’s launch. “It’s good for doctors who want to practice the best medicine possible, the way they always wanted to. It’s good for businesses and health plans looking for healthcare partners that deliver the highest possible value and outcomes. And it’s good for the country as higher quality, lower cost care will help lessen the strain on our budget and our economy.”
After a stint as a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institute and a position on the board of patient engagement company Get Real Health, Mostashari isn’t letting his step back from government service slow down his enthusiasm for healthcare reform.  “For me, health IT was never the ‘ends,’ but a ‘means’ to better health and better care, and I continue to believe that better data and technology is the key to a successful transformation of health care,” he adds.
“And it is why the attempts to do so now can succeed, where they have failed before. Empowering doctors on the frontlines of medicine with cutting edge technology that helps them understand and improve the health of all their patients- that is the mission of our new company, and one that has animated my entire career.”
Dig Deeper
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
ACOs Lack Resources, Skills for Population Health Management
Accountable care organizations, in conjunction with technologies like patient portals, health information exchanges, and EHRs, are a way to revolutionize the relationship between provider and patient, he told EHRintelligence in March, and goes far beyond any CMS or ONC requirements that may be in place.
“I think many providers will first begin to implement these sort of technologies in order to meet the meaningful use requirements, but they will continue to use them and they will really see the value in them if they don’t just do it for meaningful use, but to actually meet the demand of new payment models, of accountable care, of reducing readmissions, and of really understanding that most of what affects people’s health doesn’t happen in the hospital or in the clinic,” Mostashari said.
“It happens when they’re home, when they’re out and about, and being able to engage with them effectively is no longer going to be optional. It’s going to be a requirement – not for any regulatory reason, but for the modern delivery of healthcare.”
Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsCare Coordination


