Ore. Medicaid CCOs slash inpatient chronic disease care by 23%

November 08, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 08, 2013 - Colorado isn’t the only state transforming the care of its Medicaid population through accountable care initiatives in hospitals and physician offices.  Oregon’s coordinated care organizations (CCOs) have shown tremendous progress in reducing unnecessary hospitalizations and emergency department visits while increasing the coordination and quality of primary care visits, facilitated by greater EHR adoption.
Although the state increased spending on primary care by almost 7%, Oregon’s CCO network has been able to cut overall per-capita spending by more than one percent, exceeding planned benchmarks.  The health system was able to save 18% on emergency department spending by cutting the number of visits by 9% below the level recorded in 2011.  Hospital admissions for congestive heart failure dropped 29%, COPD by 28%, and there were 14% fewer adult asthma admissions.
Primary care visits were up by 18% across a variety of quality indicators.  A push to bring patients into a patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model was highly successful.  Enrollment increased by 36% over the past year.  These improvements were driven in part by providers embracing EHR technology which allows them to collect and share data across the care continuum.  In 2011, Oregon’s EHR adoption rate sat at just over a quarter.  By 2013, that rate had nearly doubled to 57% of providers.
“Reduced emergency department use and increased primary care are exactly what we want to be seeing at this stage of coordinated care,” said Governor John Kitzhaber. “It shows that the local coordinated care organizations are working hard to shift toward care that helps keep people healthier and reduces waste and inefficiency in the health care system. As we open health care up to more Oregonians, this model is showing early promise of innovation that can spread across the health care system.”
Dig Deeper
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
AMA: Real EHR Data in Med School Will Boost “Informatics IQ”
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
CCO performance was measured by a variety of quality indicators, including patient satisfaction data.  Quality measures examined for the report include the number of children receiving a follow-up visit after being prescribed medication for ADHD, the percentage of women receiving first trimester prenatal care, and the consistency of diabetes screenings.  Many of the measures were far below state benchmarks when data was first collected in 2011, but the first half of 2013 showed providers were working hard to improve.
“We are greatly encouraged with the performance of coordinated care. When unnecessary hospitalizations are reduced concurrent with increased primary care, that is a very good sign that cost savings are stemming from improved care,” says Bruce Goldberg, M.D., director of the Oregon Health Authority. “At the same time, we know progress will not be linear. This is really just the beginning. As we move forward with coordinated care, there may be times when we see great gains and other times when things lag. The important thing is that we keep moving forward and continue to publicly report outcomes and make improvements where we need to.”
  Tagged Accountable CareAccountable Care OrganizationsEHR UseHospital ReadmissionsPatient CarePopulation Health Management


