Healthcare Big Data Analytics Key to Accountable Care ROI

June 05, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 05, 2015 - Healthcare’s investment in big data analytics is already paying off among those who have also embraced accountable care and value-based reimbursement, finds a new industry survey conducted by the Healthcare Financial Management Association (HFMA). 
More than half of financial executives responding to the poll said that they have achieved measurable return on investment (ROI) from value-based payment models, thanks in large part to big data analytics competencies that have paved the way.
The survey of nearly 150 senior financial hospital executives highlighted the role that analytics can play in generating actionable insights that lead to cost reductions, better patient outcomes, and improved communications across the care continuum. 
When asked about which organizational skills are most important for seeing financial success in an era of changing reimbursement, data analytics topped the charts.  The use of care quality measures to gauge internal performance, as well as population health management tools like the ability to monitor patient regimen adherence, are allowing providers to succeed in a landscape where revenue and outcomes are intertwined.
Dig Deeper
Business Intelligence Tools Bring Insights to Organ Donation Network
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Physician-Level Data May Not Reduce Opioid Prescription Rates
“It’s encouraging that many providers are achieving a positive ROI from value-based payment models,” said HFMA President and CEO Joseph J. Fifer, FHFMA, CPA. “Improving our ability to share clinical information across the continuum is key to extending these results and making them sustainable.”
Despite the positive outlook on big data, respondents repeated a theme that has remained all too common in the industry: data interoperability is still widely lacking, and immature health information exchange infrastructure is making it difficult to truly take advantage of what value-based reimbursement has to offer.
Only sixteen percent of executives think their organizations are “highly capable” of bridging gaps in interoperability, even though 68 percent believe that interoperability will become an extremely important component of the revenue cycle within the next three years.  More than half of organizations don’t expect to get there.
During that same time frame, hospital executives predict that they will be receiving between thirty and seventy percent of their reimbursement from value-based arrangements, which leaves little time for organizations to bulk up their health IT infrastructure sufficiently to allow real-time clinical data analytics at the point of care, provide tools to ensure care coordination and follow-up, and tackle the intractable problems of chronic disease management in order to produce better outcomes and lower costs.
  Close to 40 percent of providers said that they haven’t yet mastered these techniques, remaining behind the curve with business intelligence and population health management capabilities that will be required for success.  Understanding how to implement real-time data access in an environment of insufficient interoperability remains a major challenge for the industry at large.
“While the positive ROI for value-based payments and focus on data analytics are promising findings, it’s clear that hospital systems have concerns about their capabilities needed to achieve interoperability,” said Roy A. Beveridge, MD, Chief Medical Officer at Humana, which sponsored the study. “The health care industry has an opportunity to help these hospitals systems chart a course toward interoperability while helping them address the expected rise of patients with chronic conditions.”
HFMA suggests that healthcare providers concerned about the big data analytics progress could benefit from stronger partnerships with both their payers and patients.  Investing in patient engagement strategies like patient portals, mHealth, and home monitoring can quickly bolster flagging chronic disease management programs, while building stronger data pipelines with payers can provide more of the timely quality measurement information necessary for informed decision-making.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


