Study: Readmissions not a good quality measure for pediatrics

November 13, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 13, 2013 - The rate of hospital readmissions is a poor indicator of the quality of pediatric care, says Dr. James Gay, Medical Director of Utilization and Case Management at Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s Hospital at Vanderbilt in a study presented at the American Academy of Pediatrics 2013 National Conference and Exhibition in late October.  While 30-day readmissions among adults has become one of the standard benchmarks for a hospital’s ability to deliver high quality care, the needs of pediatric patients differ so much that focusing resources on lowering the number for numbers’ sake may be inefficient, Gay argues.
“The concern that many of us have is that there is much less to be gained from a major effort to reduce pediatric readmissions because so many are due to an unpredictable disease process,” Gay told Medcape Medical News. “There are many fewer pediatric than adult hospitalizations in the first place, and the numbers and rates of readmissions are lower in children.”
Nearly one in five adult Medicare patients discharged from the hospital will return within one month, but only 6% to 10% of children will do the same – and many of those readmissions are either planned by physicians during the course of treatment or a predictable outcome of therapies like chemotherapy, which can damage a child’s immune system.
The researchers examined case files for more than 1.7 million pediatric patients from 58 children’s hospitals across the country.  They used 3M’s Potentially Preventable Readmissions (PPR) grouping software, the same algorithm used by many state Medicaid agencies to run their readmissions numbers, to sort the data into preventable and non-preventable causes.
Dig Deeper
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
However, Gay found that the algorithm didn’t accurately capture all of the factors involved in pediatric care.  Of the 40% of readmissions deemed preventable, 80% were related to sickle cell crisis, pneumonia, asthma, appendectomy, and bronchiolitis.  But as a pediatrician, Gay would argue that the need for readmission can’t be predicted in enough cases to abide by a single algorithm.  His research points to the need for more refinement to the PPR algorithm, he noted, with particular attention to the special requirements of pediatric care.
“There’s no doubt high readmission rates can be an indication of poor care,” added Mark Neuman, MD, MPH, from Boston Children’s Hospital, who also worked on the study. “But by no means is it the only quality measure. If readmission rates are going to hold so much water in terms of financially penalizing health care institutions, we need to be sure the metrics in place are as accurate as possible.”
Neuman also noted that children’s hospitals typically accept the sickest patients in need of intensive specialty care as a matter of course.  To financially penalize these facilities for caring for a population with complex needs is counterproductive.  “These kids often require far more care and resources than a typical patient cared for at a non-pediatric hospital,” he said.  “Given that disparity, holding children’s hospitals accountable to a universal readmission metric with clear imperfections isn’t fair.”
Tagged Accountable CareHospital ReadmissionsPatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


