GAO Eyes Population Health, Big Data with HIT Advisory Committee

August 04, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 04, 2017 - Population health management and big data analytics skills are high on the priority list for the fifteen new members of the Government Accountability Office’s new Health Information Technology Advisory Committee.
Established by the 21st Century Cures Act in 2016, the Committee replaces the Office of the National Coordinator’s HIT Policy and Standards Committee with the goal of recommending innovative strategies to improve the nation’s health information technology infrastructure, standards, and specifications.
Members of the committee will advise the National Coordinator about how to achieve the widespread health data interoperability that underpins so many of the industry’s reform goals, including seamless population health management, precision medicine, and the transition to value-based reimbursement.
Dig Deeper
21st Century Cures Act Rekindles Information Blocking Debate
Interoperability, Population Health Remain Top EHR Challenges
True Interoperability Requires Proof before Mandates, HL7 Says
The appointees, who hail from the vendor community, the payer industry, and the provider sphere, represent a broad range of viewpoints and bring a great deal of hands-on experience to the difficult problem of breaking down data siloes, implementing industry-wide standards, and encouraging stakeholders to work cooperatively to solve deeply entrenched business problems.
The team will also help to address issues with the current EHR certification criteria.
“It is extremely valuable to have a range of perspectives and expertise in helping the government address challenges related to health information technology,” said Gene L. Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United States and head of the GAO.
“GAO received nominations for many highly qualified individuals, and I’m pleased to announce this first round of appointments to the HIT Advisory Committee.”
A sampling of the organizations represented in the new committee include Epic Systems, HL7, Partners Healthcare, Mayo Clinic, Accenture, Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield, Marshfield Clinic, Baptist Health, the Indiana Health Information Exchange and the University of Mississippi Medical Center.
Among the members are executive directors, informaticists, patient advocates, chief information officers, chief medical information officers, physicians, analysts, and organizational transformation leaders.
The HIT Advisory Committee will work alongside the HIT Policy Committee to develop and recommend next steps for improving the nation’s interoperability and health information exchange infrastructure.
The newly appointed members will serve terms that vary in length between one and three years.  For more information and brief biographies of all the new appointees, please click here. 
Tagged 21st Century Cures ActClinical InformaticsGovernment Accountability Office GAOInteroperabilityPopulation Health Management


