Million Hearts Picks 30 Population Health Management Winners

February 25, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 25, 2015 - Thirty healthcare providers across the nation have been recognized as Hypertension Control Champions for their commitment to the Million Hearts Challenge, a population health management program aimed at lowering rates of heart attack and stroke.
Launched by the CDC in 2012 as a way to provide best practices and encouragement for healthcare providers battling the prevalence of uncontrolled high blood pressure in American patients, the program awards the title of “Champion” to participating organizations that achieve a hypertension control rate of 70 percent or more.
“This year we have more Champions than ever before, demonstrating that high performance is achievable and that we are on a path to better heart health across the nation,” said HHS Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell. “More and more practices are using evidence-based strategies to help patients keep blood pressure down—a strong sign that we’re making progress in preventing heart attacks and strokes.”
All together, the thirty providers care for approximately 3.5 million patients across nineteen states, encompassing both rural and urban areas.  Community health centers, clinics, individual providers, and large multi-site systems, including Kaiser Permanente of Southern California, all received this year’s honors.
Dig Deeper
Dental Care is the Missing Piece of Population Health Management
Claims Data Analytics Show Diabetes Has Third Largest Health Impact
Using Risk Scores, Stratification for Population Health Management
In 2013, only nine organizations achieved “Champion” status, but those providers covered more than double the number of patient lives compared to 2014’s winners.  The Veterans Health Administration, Kaiser Permanente of Northern California, and ThedaCare, a five hospital system based in Wisconsin, were among the 2013 honorees.
“Million Hearts launched this challenge in 2012 to recognize clinicians and health care teams across the country for helping their patients protect heart health,” added CDC Director Tom Frieden, MD, MPH. “We implore other health systems to follow the lead of these physicians and clinics which are succeeding in saving lives and preventing disability from avoidable heart disease and stroke.”
The National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) notes that a reliance on EHR technology and clinical analytics is key for healthcare organizations that wish to focus on hypertension as a component of population health management.  The Million Hearts program also encourages the use of disease registries, clinical decision support tools, and patient reminders to help achieve its goals.
“We heard consistent themes across the high-performing practices and health plans we interviewed. One was the importance of good data, and analysis of the data to identify gaps and areas for improvement,” says a report prepared for the CDC on what makes some organizations high performers for cardiovascular healthcare.
“An emphasis on population health management through analysis of available data—claims, clinical data and administrative data. [Successful providers] told us it is important to have up-to-date information and the ability to use these data to drill down at the regional, practice and patient levels.”
The use of coordinated care teams or participation in the patient-centered medical home (PCMH) model were also factors in achieving high hypertension control rates, the study continues, and the implementation of community outreach programs can provide education and chronic disease management services to reach the maximum possible number of patients.  With one third of Americans suffering from high blood pressure and only half of those patients achieving an adequate level of control, outreach beyond the organization’s walls can be an effective strategy.
“We are excited to host this challenge for the third year and showcase more winners than ever before,” said Dr. Janet Wright, a board-certified cardiologist and executive director of Million Hearts. “Like the practices and clinicians recognized in previous years, these 2014 Champions are finding innovative, evidence-based ways to detect hypertension, connect patients with appropriate clinical care, and make blood pressure control their goal to save lives from heart attack and stroke.”
A full list of the thirty winners can be found here.
Tagged Accountable CareChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health Management


