Population health management boosts Medicaid patient engagement

September 15, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 15, 2014 - A data-driven population health management program targeted to Medicaid patients in Oregon has successfully improved patient engagement, enhanced patient-provider communications, and raised HEDIS scores for chronic disease sufferers, according to a case study from CareOregon Advantage, a nonprofit care management organization.  By enhancing communication with patients and building stronger relationships with those most at-risk for falling behind on self-management and medication adherence, CareOregon improved patient satisfaction rates from 79.2 percent to 98.8 percent while raising the level of preventative care.
“We are really focusing on the Triple Aim as part of our business plan, and so my thought was, if we’re really struggling around the financial return on investment, let’s look and see if the other two elements of the Triple Aim – the patient experience and health outcomes – have been impacted by this program,” said Dr. Margie Rowland, Chief Medical Officer of CareOregon, to HealthITAnalytics.
Providing a strong foundation of patient-provider communication was one of the most important aspects of the program, which leveraged risk stratification and clinical analytics software from Health Integrated to identify patients with chronic diseases who would benefit from more robust contact with the healthcare system.  Patients with one or more of twenty chronic conditions were eligible from increased phone contact and personal coaching from a healthcare professional.
Eighty-four percent of patients who discussed better ways to communicate with their physicians reported that the conversations helped them to convey their questions and concerns in a more effective manner, while 80 percent of those surveyed about the population health management program believed that their clinician made a measurable difference in how their handled their health issues, and 96 percent were highly satisfied with their personal clinician.  Patients expressed higher levels of confidence in self-care, improvements in exercise levels, better eating choices, and a better ability to cope with stresses produced by their health issues.
Dig Deeper
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
HHS Distributes $458M in 21st Century Cures Opioid Abuse Grants
Not only did patients participating in the program measure higher on almost all HEDIS score categories, but the program was highly effective in raising the overall level of competence for patients who may have felt overwhelmed by their health status or lacked the skills to organize and accomplish the different tasks involved in managing multiple chronic conditions, Rowland says.
“You have to remember, this is a Medicaid population, and many of our members are very poor,” she said.  “Many of them have literacy issues, and they also have social issues that are impacting their ability to interface appropriately with the healthcare system.  That’s a pervasive issue in our population. It’s not just about taking the right pills or coming back for appointments, but it’s making sure people actually understand their illness and understand what questions to ask, or getting help with transportation to their provider.  It’s not just health literacy.  It’s literacy in general.”
“The tools necessary to assist the population really depend on the severity of the individual,” she added.  “We consider the synergy program as a strategy for people with chronic illness who are not overly sick.  We have a more intensive telephonic case management program for those who are sicker: for those who are really challenged, we actually bring healthcare workers to their homes to help them.  This population management program targets that middle-grade population in the Medicaid arena.  We have those who are dealing with chronic illness, and often with biopsychosocial issues, and they do need support, but then there are also those who are sicker who need more intensive interventions, so this is a piece of a more comprehensive strategy.”
Tagged Care CoordinationChronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


