Did Truven rank Medicare upcoding hospital’s quality too highly?

December 06, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 06, 2013 - Truven Health Analytics’ well-known hospital ranking system is coming under fire after a pair of medically-trained lawmakers released a letter strongly criticizing the company for allegedly ranking Prime Healthcare Services much more highly than it deserved after the hospital chain was accused of padding its Medicare billings to indicate a greater prevalence of rare and complex diseases without documentation to back up the claims.  The letter calls into question the integrity of Truven’s ranking system since the company’s Top 100 Hospitals and Top 15 Health Systems awards apparently did not take into account the fact that Prime has been under federal investigation for falsifying its billing to secure higher reimbursements.
Hospitals are given financial bonuses for successfully treating patients with major complications and comorbidities, often totaling thousands of dollars per case, State Senator Dr. Ed Hernandez (D-CA) and Assemblyman Dr. Richard Pan write in the letter.  Prime was recently fined $275,000 by federal regulators for falsely coding more than 1000 cases of Kwashiokor syndrome, the result of severe malnutrition most often the product of widespread famine.  The CEO and CMO of the hospital were also fined $95,000 for sharing the un-redacted record of one of the hospital’s patients with newspaper staff, hospital employees, and other members of the press without her permission.
An investigation into Prime’s chronic upcoding epidemic by California Watch also found that Chino Valley Medical Center saw 442 Medicare patients experiencing both acute heart failure and septicemia, comprising 7.8% of all Medicare cases seen by the facility – 15 times the statewide average.  Nearly 100 patients managed to leave the hospital, alive and well, after staying two days or less.
Prime was recognized on the Top 15 Health Systems list and had eight of its hospitals added to the Top 100 Hospitals rankings despite a recorded presentation by Prime CEO Dr. Prem Reddy urging physicians to falsely document comorbid conditions and admit Medicare patients to the hospital unnecessarily in order to collect higher reimbursements.
Dig Deeper
Big Data Shows Gender-Based Medical Error, Patient Safety Patterns
Alarm Fatigue, Health IT Woes Top ECRI 2017 Patient Safety List
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Truven’s rankings apparently took the hospital chain’s Medicare billings on face value and did not investigate the fact that nearly a third of its senior population was so protein deficient as to be on the brink of death.  If 20% of Prime’s Medicare seniors were really afflicted with the disease, the letter asserts, then the miraculous ability of Prime’s physicians to treat such serious conditions with shorter-than-average hospital stays would certainly warrant a high quality rating from Truven.  However, despite Truven’s assertion that any hospital caught falsifying its data will be removed from the awards list, the company seems to have ignored all of Prime’s federal issues.
Michael G. Boswood, President and CEO of Truven Analytics, responded to the letter by saying that awards are indeed revoked if hospitals are caught lying, but argues that since Prime has not freely admitted guilt or been convicted of wrongdoing, rescinding the awards would be “premature”.  Since the Quality Improvement Organization of California did not sanction the medical centers involved, “we generally do not take action contrary to the official findings of an authority that investigated the issue…and found no wrong doing.”
The integrity of the Truven Health Analytics ranking system recently received a one-star rating from the Healthcare Association of New York State (HANYS) due to its lack of data quality, consistency, and transparency.  With choosy patients increasingly using hospital scorecards as the determining factor in where to seek treatment, the importance of trustworthy rankings is continuing to grow.
Tying reimbursements to quality outcomes is supposed to prevent such egregious abuses of the Medicare system, but CMS relies on accurate data from hospitals and whistleblowers to spot wrongdoing.  Due to funding deficiencies, CMS has been forced to cut 400 fraud investigation staff despite an increased number of cases.  While it has tried to close the gap by increasing financial rewards for citizen tipsters, CMS has been unable to delve into at least 1200 complaints because of its hobbled fraud department.
Tagged Clinical DataHospital QualityPatient CareQuality Of Care


