ONC pushes “paradigm shift” to support patient-centered care

January 16, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 16, 2014 - The Office of the National Coordinator (ONC) is heading into a new era with the appointment of new chief Karen DeSalvo, and is also taking a big step towards patient-centered accountable care with a new “Person @ Center” roadmap.  In a recent blog post on HealthIT.gov, Director of the Office of Policy and Planning Jodi G. Daniel, JD, MPH applauded the new approach to using data-driven health IT to foster patient empowerment and manage the health of populations at large and the individual in particular.
“When I started at ONC nearly a decade ago, there was a lot of talk about ‘patient-centered care’ and how health IT supports this view,” Daniel wrote.  “Most of the comments I heard throughout the health care and health IT space were about having the health care provider obtain a more complete view of the patient.  I was struck by the ‘provider-centric’ thinking around patient care.”
“A little over a year ago, we embarked on an effort to look to a long term future, where health IT and communications technology could support people in managing their own health and partnering in their health care,” she continued. “We engaged visionaries and subject matter experts to help us develop a policy framework for putting the person more at the center of their own health and health care, enabled by health IT.  We wanted to set aspirational goals and some milestones along the way so that federal and private actors can all move toward the same end.”
An issue brief outlines the ONC’s plan to make true patient-centered care a reality by 2020.  The goal is to teach patients to access their personal health information and encourage them to make informed, empowered decisions about their own self-management of their care.  Robust information exchange will allow seamless transitions of care, while complex data analytics will allow providers to aid patients in making good choices and proactively reach out to consumers in order to prevent future complications.
Dig Deeper
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
Regional Variation Points Out Value of Antibiotic Stewardship
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
“Information is shared, as appropriate, between the individual and all their care partners to enable informed, participatory decision-making as desired by the individual,” the brief envisions.  “Everyone who holds information about an individual exercises responsible information stewardship.  People can decide whether and how much to participate in managing their health and health care.”
In order to accomplish these goals, the ONC is backing several programs that will equip providers to tackle the complex problems facing the industry.  The major initiative, of course, is Meaningful Use, which is entering Stage 2 in 2014.  Other projects include the Blue Button initiative, which has been successful in promoting patient engagement and data sharing, as well as the Investing in Innovation (i2) Program, which awards prizes to breakthroughs in consumer eHealth and data issues that prevent interoperability and streamlined patient care.
Achieving the vision of enabling individuals to be active in managing their health and partnering in their health care is a complex undertaking that will occur over a long period of time,” the brief concludes. “Yet it is crucial to realizing the full benefits of health reform efforts. Changes in payment models and acceptance of technological advances will alter existing models of care. It is unknown if consumers and providers will fully embrace the resulting cultural shift. ONC is optimistic that stakeholders will rise to these challenges and will realize the vision for improved health outcomes.”
Tagged Accountable CareEHR UseHospital QualityHospital ReadmissionsPatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


