AMA adopts policy defining team-based medical care

June 10, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 10, 2014 - Members of the American Medical Association (AMA) have voted to approve a measure outlining the definition of team-based health care and providing physicians with a list of elements to consider when developing new delivery models that encourage care coordination and population health management in order to reduce health disparities, cut costs, and raise the quality of care.
Newly defined as “the consistent use by a physician of the leadership knowledge, skills and expertise necessary to identify, engage and elicit from each team member the unique set of training, experience and qualifications needed to help patients achieve their goals, and to supervise the application of these skills,” the AMA’s approach to the care team puts the physician at the center of a diverse group of professionals all working towards the best outcome for a patient.
“Teamwork in a health care setting between physicians and non-physician practitioners is important as the medical community works to better coordinate care to ensure patients get the best possible care,” said AMA President Ardis D. Hoven, MD.
At the AMA’s 2014 Annual Meeting, Dr. Robert A. Probe, an orthopedic surgeon at Scott and White Health System in Central Texas, explained how adopting a team-based approach helped to reduce wait times for patients and improved access to care.  “Most of our patients thought S&W stood for ‘sit and wait,’” he said during his presentation.  “As an orthopedic surgeon, I was frustrated that I couldn’t see patients until their fractures were 90 percent healed because they couldn’t get in to see me for three weeks.  Now I can see every patient in a timely manner. If a patient makes an appointment that day, they can be seen that day.”
Dig Deeper
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
Should Connectivity, Not Comprehensiveness, be the EHR Goal?
In addition to seeing patients more quickly, an increase in efficiency has allowed the health system to nearly double the number of patients they can see over the past decade.  S&W hired more physician assistance and advance practice nurses to take over the process of educating patients about their chronic conditions, freeing up physicians to practice at the top of their skill sets.  By encouraging all levels of care professionals to work together in a coordinated environment, the team is able to focus on quality improvements and maximize efficiency.
“The policy passed today will help physicians transition to new care models by promoting flexibility to develop practice designs based on physician needs, the populations they serve, relevant state laws, and protection from the burdens that would come from a one-size-fits-all approach,” Hoven added.
Tagged Care CoordinationPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


