CDC flags sexual orientation as population health indicator

July 16, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 16, 2014 - Patients who self-identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual in the 2013 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) showed distinct patterns in health disparities that could help providers manage population health more effectively, says the Center for Disease Control in a July report.  From health services utilization to asthma and diabetes rates and lifestyle behaviors such as smoking and drug use, this type of typically under-analyzed socio-demographic data can provide new dimensions for clinical analytics and population health management goals to produce better outcomes for underserved patients.
As part of the Healthy People 2020 goals, HHS has attempted to decrease the specific health disparities experienced by lesbian, gay, or bisexual (LGB) patients by collecting more standardized data on sexual identity.  The 2013 NHIS survey is the first to include questions about the topic in an effort to enable long-term monitoring of the issue, the CDC says, although it did not include questions about gender identity.  While just 3.4% of respondents to the survey identified as non-straight, the data revealed significant differences in decision making and healthcare experiences between this population and the majority.
While 28% of LGB patients identified as cigarette smokers, just 19.6% of straight patients admitted the same.  Thirty-five percent of gay or lesbian adults and 41.5% of bisexual adults reported having had five or more drinks in one day at least once in the previous year as compared with 26% of straight adults.  Straight women were 9% more likely to report being in “very good health,” while bisexual adults reported a significantly higher likelihood of having experienced significant psychological distress over the past thirty days.
Gay men were twice as likely as straight men to receive HIV testing, but straight adults were nearly 10% more likely to report having a regular healthcare provider than bisexuals.  Twice as many bisexual patients as straight patients reported that they failed to receive necessary medical care due to the cost of services even though there were few differences in insurance coverage rates.
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
Precision Medicine Aids 20% Drop in Pediatric Cancer Deaths
Business Intelligence Tools Bring Insights to Organ Donation Network
Sexual orientation remains a touchy social issue in many areas of the country, but patients who are willing to identify as LGB in public data reporting situations can give healthcare providers a clue as to where to target population health management techniques, community outreach services, and testing or screenings, even with such a small sample size of data.  With LGB patients more likely to participate in risky behaviors such as smoking and binge drinking and less likely to access healthcare services than their straight counterparts, providers can start to understand the challenges experienced by this population and tailor their efforts accordingly.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsPatient DataPopulation Health Management


