Study: Community interventions reduce hospital readmissions

April 15, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 15, 2014 - Patients who received a tailored care plan and follow-up from a community health worker were more likely to access primary care services and stay out of the hospital, according to a new study published in JAMA this week.  Among patients of lower socioeconomic status, those who received detailed care planning from a health worker while still in the hospital were 13% more likely to visit a primary care facility after discharge and were significantly more satisfied with the communication efforts of their providers.
“Socioeconomic and behavioral factors can negatively influence post-hospital outcomes among patients of low socioeconomic status,” write a team of researchers from the University of Pennsylvania, who followed 446 patients between 2011 and 2012, assigning half to a community health worker and the other half to the normal suite of hospital services. “Traditional hospital personnel often lack the time, skills, and community linkages required to address these factors.”
While the patients were still in the hospital, those assigned to the community health workers discussed action plans for recovery and achieving ongoing health goals, and continued receiving support for a minimum of two weeks.  While 47.9% of control group patients followed up with a primary care provider within 14 days of discharge, 60% of the care plan patients did the same.  Ninety-one percent of care plan patients reported high quality discharge communication, compared with just 78.7% of control patients, and those with access to community support also showed greater improvements in their mental health.
The researchers found little difference, however, in overall physical health or medication adherence, and similar numbers of patients in both arms of the study were readmitted to the hospital within 30 days.  However, the care plan patients were less likely to be readmitted multiple times for the same issue.  Among the 63 patients readmitted during the study, just 15.2% of care plan patients experienced recurrent readmissions compared to 40% of the control group.
Dig Deeper
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
30-Day Patient Mortality Rates Drop During Hospital Inspections
The team concludes that “Patient-centered community health worker intervention improves access to primary care and quality of discharge while controlling recurrent readmissions in a high-risk population. Health systems may leverage the community healthcare workforce to improve post-hospital outcomes by addressing behavioral and socioeconomic drivers of disease.”
Tagged Coordination of CareHospital QualityPatient EngagementPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


