$81M in PCORI Grants to Fund Clinical Data Research Networks

December 31, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 31, 2014 - The Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) is offering more than $81 million in grants to fund up to thirteen clinical data research networks (CDRNs).  Following a 2014 effort to develop PCORnet, the second round of funding will continue the development of clinical data research networks to further population health management, clinical analytics, and the use of EHR infrastructure to collect data on patient populations.
PCORI provided around $100 million for Phase I of the PCORnet project, which established 11 CDRNs, 18 patient-powered research networks (PPRNs), and a coordinating center.
“In Phase II, PCORnet will be established as a national resource to support multi-network patient-centered observational and interventional research,” the grant announcement explains. “During this phase, the network will begin to address research queries and answer important clinical research questions as it continues to build additional infrastructure for conducting more efficient and complex clinical research.”
When competed, the Phase II projects will focus on enhancing patient engagement, producing analytics-ready standardized data using a common data model, develop an infrastructure to support clinical trials and public confidence in medical research, and attract qualified investigators to important discovery projects.
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Population Health is Top Data Analytics Challenge for Providers, Payers
Artificial Intelligence to Make More Health Jobs Than it Eliminates
Interested applicants must deliver a letter of intent by January 15, 2015.  The application deadline is April 7, 2015.  Projects may request a maximum of $6.25 million in their budgets and may run for a total of three years.  For more information and details on the grant process, see the full solicitation here.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureApplied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsClinical Data


