ICD-10 is Here, but October 1 Isn’t the Date to Worry About

October 01, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 01, 2015 - It’s happened.  ICD-10 is here.  After years of arguments, delays, trepidation, and downright hostility from healthcare providers deeply concerned about their revenue cycles and coder productivity, the last roadblocks to the updated code set have been steamrolled flat. 
Providers must code all claims with an October 1, 2015 date of service in ICD-10, but they aren’t necessarily going to be coding October 1 date of service claims today.  And they certainly won’t be receiving payment on October 1 claims the same day they submit them.  Most providers won’t start to see any ICD-10 claims returned – paid or denied – for at least a few weeks. 
AHIMA ended its annual convention on September 30 with a champagne toast to ICD-10 implementation, and the ICD-10 Coalition called the long-awaited date “a historic moment for US healthcare and a major milestone in the evolving transformation of our 21st century healthcare delivery system.”
But the hard work and worry has only just begun.  What do providers have to keep in mind during the anxious waiting period between coding their first ICD-10 claims and receiving their first revenue from the upgraded ontology?
“Organizations will be feeling it financially by the 16th of October,” predicts Mary Beth Haugen, founder and CEO of the Haugen Consulting Group.  “We should start seeing some claims come back by then – especially Medicare claims, which take about 14 days to process.  The whole fourth quarter is going to be pretty key for people to really understanding the impact of ICD-10.”
READ MORE: As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
“I think it won’t be until the middle or end of October that we’re going to start seeing the impact of ICD-10,” agreed Barbara Manor, MA, RHIA, Vice President of HIM at the Sisters of Charity Health System, which includes eight acute care hospitals spread across three states.  “We’re going to drop claims on October 3, and then those take a while to be remediated by the payer.  And the payers are going to be having some interesting times, so we’ll see how it goes.”
Since the beginning of the transition period, ICD-10 leaders have advised healthcare providers to get a good idea of their baseline productivity and revenue under ICD-9 so they have some idea of how to gauge the changes of ICD-10.  While it may be a little late to start watching coder behavior as the switch puts pressure on the HIM department, there is still time for providers to go back into their data logs and generate reports on financial trends.
“We had baseline metrics from before, so we’re able to report that out to our steering committee,” said Manor.  Strong executive buy-in has always been a recommended competency for the ICD-10 transition, and Sisters of Charity plans to continue bringing together its high-level steering committee to monitor the system’s progress.  “We have everything scheduled out at least through December, and they’re willing to keep meeting if we need to after that.  So we definitely have that ongoing support, which is good.”
ICD-10 leaders will have to keep that support flowing freely throughout the organization as coders face the reality of a brand new way of doing their jobs.  “ICD-10 levels the playing field,” said Thea Campbell, MBA, RHIA, Director of Health Information at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.  “Gone are the days of being able to say, ‘I have 30 years of coding experience.’  Starting on October 1, we all have one day of coding experience.”
Collecting the right metrics will be critical to judge productivity over the coming weeks, added Debbie Schrubb, Corporate HIM Director for Kettering Health Network in Ohio.
READ MORE: The Role of Healthcare Data Governance in Big Data Analytics
“We are prepared to do metrics every single day, and we’re going to share those with our finance executives,” she said.  “That will include charges not billed, A/R days, and productivity metrics for our coders.  We’re going to monitor the coders every single day.  We know their baseline, and we want to see how they’re progressing.”
Constant monitoring may seem like it will just add to the stress levels of medical coders, but Schrubb and Campbell both believe that keeping an eye on proceedings will ultimately benefit the coders and the organization as a whole.  “We think it will help us figure out who may need more help,” Schrubb said.
“We continue to want to be invested in training,” agreed Campbell.  “Some of that has to be very individualized.  If you know how one coder works in ICD-10, you only know how one coder works in ICD-10.  Making education available so a coder can get continual feedback is very important.”
“Don’t wait until you start to get coding denials before you audit your coders,” Campbell warned. “It’s important to proactively identify errors and take steps to correct them as they occur.”
It is also important to keep spirits high and recognize that tough times are ahead for the HIM department.  A little extra encouragement for the troops may make the difference between a panicked workforce and a coding staff that’s ready to rise to the challenge.
READ MORE: Google DeepMind: Blockchain Can Ensure Health Data Integrity
“We’re going to give our coders survival bags, which will have a packet of tissues, some pain relievers, a handful of motivating quotes, and candy,” Schrubb said.  “I’m going to see them all personally, give them their new ICD-10 code books, and just tell them that we’re here for them if they need us.”
“Our plan is to start coding 10/1 encounters on October 4,” she continued.  “We’re going to work four weeks of six days, just to see how things are going to go, and I have some dedicated people to take care of whatever’s left from September 30 and prior, and they’re going to work on that to clear it out.  I don’t think everyone is doing it that way, but we thought it would be better if they don’t have to be going back and forth between ICD-9 and ICD-10.  That might help them stay a little more focused.”
At Sisters of Charity, coder productivity isn’t the only problem to worry about.  The health system has hospitals in Montana, which is one of four states granted ICD-10 extensions for their Medicaid services.   
“They’re going to be mapping back and forth between ICD-9 and ICD-10,” Manor said.  “So we’re going to have to really watch our Montana claims.  We’re going to have to watch the accuracy.”
Such crosswalking techniques are going to be tricky for providers hoping to understand how ICD-10 is going to bring changes to the revenue cycle, added Haugen.  “How are we going to know what they’re mapping to, and how do we validate that’s what the claim should be paid like?  That’s going to add a lot of complexity to this.”
“There could be other payers who are doing that, too, who haven’t shared that information,” she pointed out.  “They’re allowed to do that, because they’re required to accept ICD-10 codes, but there’s nothing in the rules that says they need to update their payment structure based on that.”
“You’re really going to have to monitor the expected and the actual payments.  You need to stay on top of it, because you can’t afford to wait two or three weeks and then say, ‘wait a minute, I’m three weeks behind, and I’ve already submitted all these other claims I haven’t gotten paid for.’”
Some providers are expecting ICD-10 to bring more accurate payment and increased revenue, since they will be able to bill more completely for some services that haven’t been properly captured under ICD-9.  The new code set will also let providers describe a patient’s conditions and complications with more detail, which may allow increased reimbursement for cases that can illustrate a higher level of complexity.
“We’re going to start looking at case mix, and I’ve also got a report that’s going to be broken down by our high-volume DRGs,” Schrubb said.  “So probably in two to four weeks, we’ll start looking to see if we have any DRG shifts going on.”
Those shifts may be beneficial for some, but other providers fear that the next few months will bring a catastrophic slide in revenue as detailed documentation requirements make it more difficult to select the right codes.  Denials may rise significantly as coders and payers fight through the intricacies of the new reimbursement schema. 
Technical problems may also rear their ugly heads as payers attempt to process ICD-10 documents.  While CMS has assured providers that its systems are up to the task, private payers have been less vocal about their readiness.  It may take several weeks to identify any processing issues, and even longer than that to ameliorate them.
In recognition this, WEDI has announced that it is keeping its searchable ICD-10 problem database open past the October 1 deadline.  Providers are able to submit issues for review and then receive answers and support from WEDI or other members of the community.  Organizations can browse or search through lists of identified problems to see if their concern has already been addressed.
“This tool has been an important component in our goal of ensuring a successful ICD-10 implementation for healthcare providers, payers, clearinghouses and vendors,” said Devin Jopp, EdD, president and CEO of WEDI. “Questions are coming in at a feverish pace. Because of this, it is important that all healthcare industry stakeholders have continued access to this valuable resource well beyond the transition deadline of October 1.”
October 1 is certainly a momentous date, but it’s just the beginning of the complicated transition to the detailed, granular code set that holds a great deal of promise for big data analytics, population health management, and more appropriate reimbursement.  The industry has made a herculean effort to get this far, especially as the stop-and-start waiting period stretched out year after year, but there will more work to do before ICD-10 becomes second nature to coders and payers.
Tagged AHIMA 2015Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data GovernanceICD-10Revenue Cycle Management


