Telehealth eye screenings push patients towards specialists

June 06, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 06, 2014 - Patient receiving telemedicine screenings for eye conditions may avoid a trip to their primary care physician, but ophthalmologists need to be prepared to handle the influx of patients that will be headed directly their way, says a JAMA study conducted within the VA system.
Despite its deeply-rooted problems with patient care, the VA has placed a significant emphasis on integrating cutting-edge telehealth technology into its vast and complex system.  A research team at the Atlanta VA, where retinal cameras are available in primary care clinics to screen for emerging vision issues in diabetic patients, monitored the impact of the system over two years to compile data for the study.
“[The cameras are] a very useful way to screen patients who are at a high risk for eye problems, like diabetic patients,” Dr. Mary G. Lynch told Reuters Health. “The VA has made a very big priority of putting cameras in all the little outpatient primary care clinics, but it would be nice to know what to prepare for in the [eye clinic].”
After examining EHR data of 2000 patients using the screening tool between 2008 and 2009, Lynch found that 465 of them were subsequently referred to an eye clinic.  Only half of the patients referred to a specialist ended up seeing one, the study found, but 36% of the patients who did follow up needed at least three visits to cope with their diseases.
Dig Deeper
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
CMS QIO Awards Promote Patient Safety, Healthcare Quality
Lynch and her team found that the mean cost incurred per patient during the 2-year study period was approximately $1000, based on Medicare cost estimates.  Diabetic macular edema produced the greatest number of ophthalmology clinic visits, tests, and surgeries, she added.
The study adds weight to existing evidence that telemedicine can be an effective way to catch conditions before they produce irreparable harm and may encourage patients to seek a higher level of care.  But it also raises the question of how providers should allocate their resources when directing a stream of new patients towards specialists who may not be prepared to receive them.  As preventative care and early diagnosis for at-risk patients becomes more integrated into the philosophy of medicine, specialists should consider how to strengthen their business practices to handle greater demands.
“Although a teleretinal screening program can be accurate and sensitive for multiple visually significant diagnoses, measurable resource burdens should be anticipated to adequately prepare for the associated increase in clinical care,” the study concludes.
Tagged Care CoordinationPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


