Truven Analytics rescinds awards to sanctioned CA hospitals

June 05, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 05, 2014 - California lawmakers are issuing guarded praise to Truven Analytics after the company adjusted its hospital rankings to reflect some of the many sanctions issued to the Prime Healthcare Services system.  Accused of upcoding, falsifying diagnoses, incurring fatal patient harm, and leaking patient records to the press, several hospitals within the Prime system have been ranked as top national facilities by Truven despite being under federal investigation and served with severe warnings by the California Department of Public Health (CDPH).
Ed Hernandez, OD, Chair of the California Senate Committee on Health and Richard Pan, MD, Chair of the Assembly Committee on Health, have pressured Truven since December of 2013 to reconsider its rankings after Prime landed on the Top 15 Health Systems and Top 100 Hospitals lists, widely used by patients to judge the quality of their care.  Hernandez and Pan accused Truven of failing to look into inflated Medicare billings, including a shocking prevalence of seniors diagnosed with the rare Kwashiorkor syndrome at Shasta Regional Medical Center.  Prime was fined $275,000 by federal regulators for these falsely coded cases, but Shasta remains on the organization’s Top 100 Hospitals list, the lawmakers point out in a letter to Truven dated May 9 obtained by HealthITAnalytics.
“We would again urge Truven to revisit its ranking of Shasta Regional Medical Center…given its incredulous and well-documented practice of billing Medicare for the rare malnutrition disorder known as Kwashiorkor at 70 times the statewide average for other hospitals,” the letter says.  “When this practice was revealed by investigative news articles, Shasta suddenly stopped this highly suspicious billing practice, making the earlier diagnoses even more suspect.”
Pan and Hernandez “appreciated” Truven’s action to rescind recognition of Desert Valley Hospital based on a CDPH sanction for improper cardiac care, however, and applauded the fact that Prime did not make it onto the Top 15 Health Systems list in 2014.  “We would ask that you apply this same basis to revoke the ranking given to Garden Grove Hospital and Medical Center,” they added, “and to evaluate whether a system with these two hospitals, as well as with the similarly penalized Alvarado Hospital, should ever have been given a Top 15 Health System award.”
Dig Deeper
Decision Support, Big Data Analytics Reduce Hospital Blood Use
CA Children’s Hospitals Win Davies Award for Analytics, Safety
KLAS: Epic Systems, Cerner Lead EHR Vendors in Sepsis Analytics
“We thank you for giving this matter your attention and for your dialogue on this important issue for healthcare consumers,” the letter concludes.
  Tagged Healthcare QualityHospital QualityPatient Safety


