ACC, AHA Update Clinical Quality Measures for Heart Problems

June 28, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 28, 2016 - In an effort to reduce harmful variation in care, prepare providers for pay-for-performance contracting, and aid the development of population health management analytics, the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association have updated their clinical quality measures and performance metrics for treating patients with atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter. 
The updates are the first since 2008, and address one of the most common chronic cardiac conditions which may affect more than six million patients.
"Atrial fibrillation is the most common cardiac arrhythmia in the United States," said Paul A. Heidenreich, MD, MS, FACC, a professor of clinical quality and analytics at Stanford University School of Medicine. 
"This condition impacts between 2.7 million and 6.1 million American adults, and this number is expected to double by 2050. Updating the measure set was a priority for the ACC and AHA."
Dig Deeper
NQF: Adding Socioeconomic Risk to Population Health Measures is a Challenge
Top 5 Questions for Payers about Population Health Initiatives
$335K Grant Supports Chronic Disease Management for Lupus
The revised quality and performance measures will now include metrics for the inpatient setting as well as the outpatient clinic in an attempt to improve care coordination and decrease variability in quality across the care continuum. 
“The ACC/AHA clinical performance and quality measure sets serve as vehicles to accelerate translation of scientific evidence into clinical practice,” states the organizations’ clinical quality task force in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, which has published the guidelines online in its latest issue.
“Measure sets developed by the ACC/AHA are intended to provide practitioners and institutions that deliver cardiovascular services with tools to measure the quality of care provided and identify opportunities for improvement.”
The measure set includes six performance measures, split between the inpatient and outpatient setting, as well as ten inpatient quality measures and eight outpatient guidelines for quality care.
The ACC and AHA note that quality and performance measures may have different applications due to variation in the evidence supporting certain therapies and clinical decisions.
“Quality measures are metrics that may be useful for local quality improvement but are not yet appropriate for public reporting or pay-for-performance programs (i.e., contexts in which performance measures are used),” the journal article explains.
“New measures are initially evaluated for potential inclusion as performance measures. In some cases, a measure is insufficiently supported by the guidelines. In other instances, when the guidelines support a measure, the writing committee may decide it is necessary to have the measure tested to identify the consequences of measure implementation. Quality measures may then be promoted to the status of performance measures as supporting evidence becomes available.”
The new set of guidelines will be added to the ACC’s PINNACLE registry for outpatient quality improvement during a future update cycle.
"The writing committee believes that implementation of this clinical performance and quality measure set by providers, physician practices, and hospital systems will help to enhance the quality of care provided to patients with atrial fibrillation in both the inpatient and outpatient settings, and thereby improve their quality of life," said Heidenreich, who chaired the effort to revamp the patient management guidelines.
The new framework stresses the use of risk scores as a key performance measure, and also encourages providers to focus on documenting treatment plans and discharge instructions while avoiding unnecessary prescriptions to patients with other serious conditions.  Shared decision-making also features as a quality measure, prompting providers to consult with their patients about the use of anticoagulants.
The ACC and AHA added that providers are free to choose which measures they adopt according to their individual needs and patient populations. 
“The writing committee acknowledges that a site may not adopt all of the quality measures,” the guidelines said, “but the writing committee wanted to ensure that the quality measures were developed on the basis of guideline recommendations and were made available to sites that may choose to implement them to look at the quality of care rendered to patients with atrial fibrillation.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical Quality MeasuresPay for PerformancePopulation Health Management


