PCORI picks 30 “Pipeline to Proposal” research grant winners

January 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 03, 2014 - In an effort to encourage community health management and medical research, the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) has awarded nearly half a million dollars to 30 individual and small group projects intended to advance patient engagement and population health.  The Tier I awards are part of a pilot program testing the effectiveness of the Pipeline to Proposal grant structure that will create new partnerships among industry stakeholders.
“This first round of Tier I Pipeline to Proposal awards will lay strong foundations to build communities interested in advancing the field of patient- and stakeholder-driven health research,” said Anne Beal, MD, MPH, PCORI’s Deputy Executive Director and Chief Officer for Engagement. “We’re pleased with the range and quality of our initial Pipeline to Proposal awards, which will provide support to build patient and community coalitions that will address issues ranging from preventing Sudden Infant Death Syndrome to caring for patients with Alzheimer’s in rural communities.  We look forward to following their progress over the next nine months.”
The awards were issued to applicants in ten Western states.  Projects include an effort by Drs. Christopher and Sandra Herron to increase community support for Parkinson’s disease in Cheyenne, Wyoming, as well as a 9-month grant to the Billings Clinic Center for Transitional Research to improve the care of Alzheimer’s patients in Montana.
While the first phase of the three-tier Pipeline to Proposal is intended to build community engagement, the second and third stages will develop research and population health management infrastructures and build towards more significant grants to fund larger projects.  “The awards are designed to support new or emerging research partnerships, the development of research infrastructure, and the generation of research questions and research priorities,” PCORI says.  “The Pipeline to Proposal Awards seek to shift the research-funding paradigm, allowing patients and stakeholders to engage and partner with researchers to study the issues that are most critical to them.”
Dig Deeper
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
Gates Foundation Grants $279M to UW Population Health Program
University of California Forms Big Data, Precision Medicine Network
PCORI also recently announced $93.5 million in funding for the development of a new clinical research network to speed work on clinical trials and provide a seamless, electronic pool of patient outcome data for analytics. “These groups will use the funds to conduct pilot projects aimed at creating, enabling, and testing common data models over the next 18 months,” said PCORI board member and Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Dr. Francis Collins in a blog post.  “If all these efforts prove successful, the network has the potential to expand to more than 100 million people all across the United States.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient CarePatient EngagementPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


