Will Meaningful Use Disgruntlement Delay Precision Medicine?

August 12, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 12, 2015 - EHRs and meaningful use simply don’t make anyone happy, if the latest in a long line of dismal survey results is to be believed.  Torturous interfaces, unbreakable data siloes, endless quality reporting requirements, and untenable financial burdens have always marred the EHR adoption process, leaving providers feeling frustrated, puzzled, and downright hostile towards health IT tools that are supposed to help, not hinder, the process of patient care. 
As backlash builds against the onerous criteria of Stage 3 meaningful use, prompting lawmakers and fed-up physicians to call for exemptions, relief, and delays, it’s easy to agree with those stakeholders who believe that meaningful use is a failed experiment, and one that should be discontinued as soon as possible. 
But are the EHR Incentive Programs really as worthless as naysayers believe?  Or can meaningful use still play a vital role in the development of big data analytics, EHR interoperability, population health management, and precision medicine?  Does the industry still need such a structured, mandated framework to drive it towards the ultimate benefits of health IT for personalized, evidence-based patient care?
The answer depends on who is asked, of course.  Physician satisfaction with EHRs has reached an all-time low, according to a new report from AmericanEHR Partners and the American Medical Association (AMA), hovering around a dismal 34 percent.  Compared to similar polls taken five years ago, physicians are expressing more dissatisfaction and less confidence that they can make their EHRs behave the way they ought to.
Forty-two percent of providers think that it is difficult or very difficult to improve efficiency with an EHR, and a whopping 72 percent believe EHRs actually cause them more work.  More than four in ten respondents say they have not yet figured out how to overcome these productivity challenges.  A previous study by the American College of Physicians found that providers lose nearly an hour of time each day to EHR-related tasks.
READ MORE: Big Data, Interoperability Top Black Book’s Trends for 2017
The meaningful use program has taken its fair share of physician flak, too.  Even before the increased interoperability and quality reporting requirements of Stage 3 were introduced, providers have balked at the administrative and financial burdens of the complex federal mandate.  Few stakeholders were surprised when CMS data from 2013 revealed a 17 percent drop-out rate among Stage 1 providers; fewer still were shocked at depressingly low attestation rates during the first few months of Stage 2.  
As negative Medicare payment adjustments loom for non-participating providers and accusations of information blocking cloud cooperative efforts to increase interoperability, there have been widespread questions about whether the program should continue in its current form.
Allscripts President and CEO Paul Black, MBA, believes that it should – at least as far as Stage 3’s interoperability requirements are concerned.  While the EHR developer has a vested interest in making sure it maintains its captive provider audience for upgrades and replacements as long as possible, Black also thinks that Stage 3 meaningful use is essential for another concern near and dear to the hearts of innovative providers: the ongoing development of precision medicine.
"I don't think we can do precision medicine if we don't do Stage 3 meaningful use,” Black told EHRintelligence.com during the Allscripts Client Experience Conference in Boston last week.  The company recently committed to a $200 million equity position in NantHealth, a genomic diagnostic testing company, with the intention of integrating precision medicine technology into Allscripts’ EHR offerings in the near future.
In order for such a feature to be worthwhile to providers who want to leverage clinical decision support engines that aid the delivery of precision medicine, the nation must maintain its fledgling focus on interoperability.  Stage 3 may not be perfect in all its particulars, but it does push the adoption of data standards and open analytics technologies that will create the large-scale data stores necessary for big data analytics and genomic research.
READ MORE: Groups Laud Health IT, Public Health Clauses of 21st Century Cures Act
"The underpinnings of Stage 3 meaningful use include the notion that I need to get in to the data to pull it out," Black said. "That will the next phase of making sure these systems are interoperable.”
“Right now we do Direct [secure messaging], which is interesting and good. It's a nice start. You can get a C-CDA out, and take the data and do something with it. It is not elegant. It is not pretty,” he said.  And it’s not sufficient for building research databanks with the breadth and depth of data required to meet President Obama’s precision medicine challenge.
To do that, EHRs have to do more than just allow researchers to extract clinical data.  They have to be intuitive and user-friendly enough to allow clinicians to input good data to begin with.  The constrained timelines of meaningful use and the certified EHR technology (CEHRT) requirements have often been blamed for a rush to implement EHR systems that are not necessarily up to scratch, leaving providers with inadequate infrastructures – or big bills for ripping out and replacing their technology.
“If I was government and had spent $30 billon [on the EHR Incentive Programs], I would expect this thing to hum," Black said, voicing a common frustration from across the industry.  Providers pouring millions of dollars into purchasing EHRs under governmental mandates might expect the same thing, but it is clear that for the most part, they haven’t received it yet.
The final stage of meaningful use doesn’t entirely address the deeply rooted systemic problems of poor data integrity and insufficient clinical documentation, either.  And despite the uproar over the impending implementation of ICD-10, the new code set may not be as useful for big data and precision medicine researchers as they might hope. 
READ MORE: Predictive Analytics, AI for Lyme Disease Gets $800K NSF Grant
If meaningful use can’t adequately prepare the healthcare system for the technical demands of a data-driven care delivery continuum, can EHR vendors do it instead?
Many of them are trying, but it’s a big ask for any one piece of the healthcare industry to take on by themselves.  Providers must shoulder some of the responsibility, too, and that may mean resigning themselves to the roadmap that meaningful use can provide. 
That doesn’t mean there shouldn’t be some changes to the program, or that it should ignore the “the distance between the proposed rules of the meaningful use program and the reality of the health care market” that have prompted such outcry against overly-stringent requirements, said Niam Yaraghi, a fellow at the Brookings Institution in a recent blog post. 
Stage 3 can be flexible but still be useful, Black says, if lawmakers and other stakeholders understand where it is currently going wrong.
"There is a fundamental reality to being careful about how much of Stage 3 meaningful use is administrative in nature and really decreases time spent by a physician,” said Black. “So making sure that the government understands the workflow changes required by a physician in order to gather the data to be compliant with Stage 3 is important. They need to understand that."
The Senate HELP Committee has certainly seemed eager enough to give providers some relief.  Committee Chair Sen. Lamar Alexander has indicated that he plans to suggest a delay to Stage 3 meaningful use until Stage 2 starts bearing some more palatable fruit. 
Putting the brakes on Stage 3 may give providers more time to figure out how to whip their EHRs into shape, but it may also delay the development of precision medicine, which has shown early promise as a way to leverage new technologies, like the Internet of Things, for tailored, innovative care. 
Allscripts isn’t the only stakeholder lavishing funding on precision medicine – academic institutions and healthcare providers are starting to heed the call for genome-based treatments that produce results in the fight against cancer and chronic disease – but for Black, the investment is a sensible step for positioning the company for long-term success in a volatile marketplace.
"This is not a bet-the-company strategy," Black insisted. "It is extraordinarily important, and very strategic to us, but it wasn't like we've gone so far off the edge that we have bet the entire future of Allscripts on this topic. Without having a precision medicine platform, however…you're not really going to be relevant in the future dialogue about how healthcare is going to be treated."
EHR vendors may become key distributers of the data collection and analytics technologies that are foundational for precision medicine work, but the operative words in Black’s sentiments might be “future dialogue.”  With so many challenges filling the plates of weary, angry, and defeated providers, it may be difficult enough just to keep the end of a grimly demanding 2015 in sight.
Whether or not Stage 2 and Stage 3 meaningful use requirements are given a second look by regulators, the industry has a long way to go before its EHR and big data analytics infrastructures are ready to take on the thorny problems of precision medicine. 
Allscripts and other EHR vendors snapping up innovative technologies to bulk up their offerings may be looking towards the future, but they should balance their forward-thinking efforts with addressing the overwhelming dissatisfaction providers are facing in the present.  
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureCMS Meaningful UseEHR InteroperabilityPrecision Medicine


