Healthcare analytics and the promise of personalized genomics

October 30, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 30, 2013 - When a patient sees an MRI of a tumor inside her, and stares at the image in shock as a physician tries to explain the next steps, she doesn’t really care how 80% of similar cases turn out.  She just wants to know how to fix what’s wrong with her, what drug she is going to respond to, and how to make sure that her children haven’t inherited a predisposition to the same disease.
Fortunately for her, personalized medicine and treatments targeted to a specific genetic makeup are no longer fanciful plot points in a sci-fi film.  Researchers are using data from hundreds of thousands of EHRs, clusters of supercomputers, and powerful analytics to bring tailored genomics to bear on cancers, metabolic disorders, and hereditary diseases.
In order to produce targeted clinical treatments, you need a lot of back-end firepower.  From IBM’s Watson supercomputer running through cancer trials to pick out the right drug at Memorial Sloan Kettering, to the Human Genome Sequencing Center at Baylor College, running on infrastructure provided by Amazon Web Services, researchers are relying on the biggest guns in the world.
“The management and analysis of genomes at the scale needed to appropriately power clinical studies requires computational infrastructure that exceeds the capacity of most institutional resources,” said Jeffrey Reid, PhD, Assistant Professor, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine. The Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium project is currently the largest in the world, generating 430 terabytes of data to be analyzed by hundreds of researchers around the globe.
This ultra-large scale project will hopefully produce really small results: treatments custom designed for the individual.  “Big data analytics influence how we deal with individual patients. We now sequence the genetics of a single tumor, model that tumor in an animal model, test drugs on that animal model and take those findings back to the patient. We can’t do that without a tremendous amount of data,” said Dennis S. Charney, MD, Anne and Joel Ehrenkranz Dean at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and President for Academic Affairs at the Mount Sinai Health System, speaking at the Working Summit on Big Data hosted by The Atlantic in partnership with the Mount Sinai Health System last week.
READ MORE: ONC Highlights Its Precision Medicine Initiative Collaborations
But it isn’t just the big health systems and academic medical centers that are taking advantage of genetic analytics to help their patients.  After five years of planning, the Community Health Clinic in Topeka, Indiana, is taking charge of the local Amish and Mennonite community, where generations of marriage within a small population is producing a startling number of recessive genetic diseases, including rare metabolic disorders in children.  In a ten-square-mile of rural Indiana live nearly 10% of all patients worldwide with nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH).
“We’re aimed specifically at prevention of crisis due to genetic disorders,” explained Jared Beasley, operations manager for the facility, to the News-Sentinel. “Part of the need is not only the volume of patients that experience these kind of conditions, it is also an economic need. By managing these genetic disorders, we can significantly reduce the need for what I’ll call crisis intervention or expensive hospitalization, or the need for travel to large specialty clinics outside the area.”
For that patient staring at her tumor, the chances of personalized treatment for her disease only get better as more and more data is generated by other patients’ EHRs and analyzed in dedicated databases by projects like the Collaborative Assessment and Recommendation Engine (CARE) at the University of Notre Dame.  “What if you could walk out of the office with a personalized assessment of your health, along with a list of personalized and important lifestyle change recommendations based on your predicted health risks?” speculates computer science professor Nitesh Chawla. “What if your physician was afforded a limitless experience to gauge the impact of your disease toward developing other diseases in the future?”
It could be coming sooner than most people expect.  “As genomics move beyond discovery into clinical practice,” says Joshua C. Denny, Assistant Professor of Biomedical Informatics and Medicine at Vanderbilt University, “the future of personalized medicine is one in which our genetic information could be simply a click of the mouse away. In this future, DNA-enabled EHR systems will assist in more accurate prescribing, risk stratification, and diagnosis. Genomic discovery in EHR systems provides a real-world test bed to validate and discover clinically meaningful genetic effects.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsGenomicsMedical ResearchPrecision Medicine


