Healthcare analytics, big data, NLP markets set for growth

December 03, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 03, 2013 - Healthcare may be lagging behind other industries in its analytics capabilities, but it won’t be doing so for long if a series of market reports accurately predict the next few years in health IT.  From big data as a service to natural language processing (NLP) to mobile healthcare, data-driven healthcare is forecast to grow by billions from now until 2018.
Healthcare analytics
MarketResearch.com predicts that the healthcare analytics market, estimated at $3.7 billion in 2012, will see a 23.7% growth rate until 2017.  The thirst for data-centric solutions among both providers and payers will expand the market to $10.8 billion in the next few years.  A desire for a measurable return on investment after implementing EHR systems, as well as the general push towards accountable care, will be the major driver of growth.
Predictive analytics
Dig Deeper
93% of Payers, Providers Say Predictive Analytics are the Future
Desire for Predictive Analytics Outpaces Hospital Investment
Using Business Intelligence to Fine-Tune Operating Room Utilization
The global predictive analytics market is currently valued at $2.08 billion and is forecast to grow at 17.8% compound annual growth rate (CAGR) until 2019, according to an analysis from ResearchMoz.us, reaching more than $6.5 billion in the next six years.  North American demands make up the majority of the segment’s expansion, with the pharmaceutical industry among the top buyers.  Business intelligence and financial analytics are major areas of exploration among vendors and customers.
Big data as a service
Research and Markets sets the “big data as a service” market on an ambitious path towards 68.93% CAGR until 2016.  Cost-effective big data solutions will drive the industry towards plug-and-play analytics tools, led by big ticket vendors such as EMC Corp., Microsoft, Google, Amazon Web Services, and IBM.
“With the technological advancements in the field of healthcare, the required space for patient data storage is increasing exponentially,” says an analyst. “Many healthcare organizations have realized recently that they are running out of space to store their assets. Therefore, the Healthcare sector is witnessing the emergence of healthcare data-as-a-service. Cloud computing enables healthcare providers as well as patients to access medical information at any time and from any location. However, many such organizations are still analyzing the feasibility and relevance of such cloud computing solutions in their IT operations.”
mHealth
mHealth is already big and getting much bigger.  The $6.21 billion market will expand to $23.49 billion by 2018, growing at a 30.5% CAGR.  Portable devices to measure cardiac conditions and diabetes will lead the way towards home health monitoring for consumers, with companies such as Medtronic, GE, Samsung, and Texas Instruments receiving special mention from Research and Markets.
Natural language processing
Natural language processing tools, used to extract free-text from clinical notes and make documentation easier through dictation, will hit nearly $10 billion in 2018, rising from $3.7 billion this year.  The 21.1% CAGR will be driven largely by American investments in software tools designed to turn the vast majority of clinical information into usable data for analytics.  Nuance, M*Modal, IBM, and other large companies will continue to provide innovative solutions for hospitals and providers over the next few years as the market expands.
Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsFinancial AnalyticsHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligencePredictive Analytics


