AHA releases stroke risk assessment, guidelines for women

February 10, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 10, 2014 - The American Heart Association has released its first official guidelines intended to help women avoid being disabled or killed by a stroke.  The risk assessments target the gender more likely to be affected by blood clots that block vital pathways to the brain, depriving it of oxygen, due to a combination of lifestyle and hormonal factors.  Nearly seven million Americans are currently living as stroke survivors, but stroke is the third leading cause of death for women.  Many women require long-term care after suffering a stroke, with cognitive dysfunction and physical symptoms like muscle weakness and difficulty speaking placing a significant burden on patients, their caregivers, and their healthcare providers.
“Now more than ever, it is critical to identify women at higher risk for stroke and initiate the appropriate prevention strategies,” writes Cheryl Bushnell, MD, MHS, FAHA, Chair of the committee charged with developing the document.  “How our society adapts to the anticipated increase in stroke prevalence among women is vitally important.  Evidence from this guideline will inform providers and researchers of the current understanding of stroke risk and prevention in women.  More importantly, this guideline may empower women and their families to understand their own risk and how they can minimize the chances of having a stroke.”
The new risk scores address the fact that women have unique genetic differences from men when it comes to immunity, hormonal factors, and reproductive stresses, the report states.  Longer life expectancy means more time for strokes to affect the elderly, many of whom are often living alone at the time of injury, delaying access to treatment and requiring costly long-term nursing care.
The guidelines raise the risk level for women with a history of high blood pressure before pregnancy, and advises that patients receive a blood pressure screening before being given birth control pills.  Preeclampsia doubles the risk of stroke during pregnancy and quadruples the risk of high blood pressure afterwards.  Women experiencing major depression or who are taking hormone therapy during menopause should be carefully monitored.
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
FDA to Streamline Regulations in Light of 21st Century Cures Act
Other risk factors that are female-specific or more prevalent in women are gestational or Type 2 diabetes, migraines with aura, hypertension, and atrial fibrillation.  Physical activity level, obesity, diet, smoking, and metabolic syndrome are equally significant as risk factors for men.
“It is important to improve stroke awareness and provide more rigorous education to women at younger ages, including childbearing ages, because of women’s increased risk of stroke with age, the risks of stroke associated with pregnancy, and the onset of stroke risk factors such as obesity, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus, which occur at younger ages,” the report concludes.  “Future research focused on risk profile development is urgently needed to appropriately tailor prevention strategies for women.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient CareQuality Of Care


