CMS: Help us reform payments to better manage chronic disease

February 17, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 17, 2014 - CMS is asking for a little help with its quest to align Medicare reimbursement with quality outcomes, and has released a request for information (RFI) inviting providers to contribute their thoughts.  As diabetes, heart disease, obesity, and other lifelong battles to maintain good health affect more and more of the patient population, both primary care providers and specialists will need to change their tactics if they wish to provide high quality, comprehensive care while reining in the runaway costs plaguing the healthcare system.
The RFI focuses on a new project to help specialists, aside from oncologists, who may receive their own reform model, find a more defined role within the care continuum and a more suitable reimbursement scheme based on their services and their quality. “The payment structure for these models could include procedural episode-based payment opportunities, complex and chronic disease management episode-based payment opportunities, or other innovative arrangements,” the notice explains.
By shifting the payment structure from billing for an individual service to billing for an “episode of care”, CMS hopes to identify outliers in service quality among practitioners.  By flagging historical variances in the level of service and patient outcomes for a particular provider, CMS can encourage that provider to refine his or her techniques to better align with best practices, or reward high-performing providers for their overall management of a patient’s needs and level of coordination with primary care and inpatient partners.
“Given the complexities and costs of treatment for Medicare beneficiaries with chronic medical conditions, specialist practitioners may share responsibility with primary care practitioners for a certain aspect of a chronically ill beneficiary’s care (such as an ongoing cardiac condition) during an episode,” the RFI says. “CMS is considering development of a model that would incentivize specialists to more efficiently manage the care provided to beneficiaries with complex or chronic medical conditions over the period of time that corresponds to the specialty practitioner’s long-term involvement with managing the beneficiary’s care.”
Dig Deeper
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
ACOs Focus on Health IT, Population Health Management Plans
“CMS would also consider scenarios where the specialist practitioner is primarily responsible for both the care a beneficiary receives for a chronic condition and the preponderance of care received by that beneficiary,” the report continues.  While this may resemble plans already in place for the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule, it would constitute a separate payment structure intended to increase the pace of pay-for-performance reimbursement. “Specifically, under the new payment model discussed above, CMS intends to incentivize more rapid changes in both services rendered and expenditures through a more comprehensive payment model that encompasses payment for an episode of care including all applicable payment systems.”
CMS is requesting input on how to best design and implement these changes, including methods to best define an “episode of care”, strategies for encouraging widespread adoption, specific conditions that might benefit from these changes, and personal experiences from providers who have tested payment innovations and population health management techniques.
Interested parties have until March 13, 2014 to provide a response.  “We look forward to receiving comments through this RFI that will inform CMS’ consideration of potential models, and we anticipate using these comments to develop payment models that meet all statutory requirements and are consistent with CMS’ mission,” the statement concludes.
Tagged Accountable CareChronic Disease ManagementHospital QualityPay for PerformancePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


