Can Telehealth Improve Population Health Management, Diagnosis?

July 27, 2015

By Sara Heath
July 27, 2015 - Two recent surveys conducted by HealthMine give interesting insights into patient engagement and population health management. The studies show the importance of wellness programs and telemedicine in properly diagnosing and controlling illness.
The first study surveyed 750 consumers enrolled in wellness programs about being diagnosed and dealing with chronic illness, according to prnewswire.com. Of the 750 surveyed, 28 percent had a chronic illness, and 42 percent were diagnosed with that illness via a wellness program.
The study also revealed that many customers would like their wellness programs to be able to diagnose illnesses for them. Seventy-four percent of those surveyed stated they would like a wellness program to be able to perform genetic testing for diseases.
Furthermore, most respondents said they would participate in screenings if they were provided by their wellness program. The most popular health screenings customers want are vision screenings, blood pressure screenings, and cholesterol screenings, with 74 percent, 73 percent, and 69 percent of respondents saying they would participate in them, respectively.
Dig Deeper
Congress: Health IT, Big Data Tools Crucial for Quality Care
Adult Vaccine Project Produces Population Health Best Practices
How Big Data Analytics Companies Support Value-Based Healthcare
While the study indicates that diagnoses of chronic illness are on the rise, it is still true that many of those illnesses go undiagnosed. According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), nearly one third of adults with diabetes do not know they have it, as reported by HealthITAnalytics.com. This startling report could be prevented with the use of health screenings in wellness programs, which can identify risk factors which contribute to chronic disease.
Staggering statistics like that could also be prevented through the use of telemedicine, which provides convenient and cost-effective healthcare. However, in another recent study by HealthMine, 41 percent of those surveyed had never even heard of telemedicine, according to news.sys-con.com.
The study suggests that age plays a large factor in a patient’s familiarity with telehealth, stating that 58 percent of 25-34 year-olds would use telemedicine, while only 37 percent of 55-64 year-olds would. Furthermore, about half of 25-34 year-olds said they are able to recognize when and how to use telemedicine, while only 34 percent of 45-54 year-olds could say the same thing.
The primary issue with these statistics is that a large majority of patients do not trust the diagnoses given via telehealth compared to those from a traditional physician visit. This is concerning because it suggests that this technology is being underutilized in diagnosing anything from a minor cold to a more significant ailment which could indicate a chronic illness like diabetes.
Bryce Williams, CEO and President of HealthMine, advocates for the utilization of wellness programs to help patients access telemedicine.
“Wellness programs can be the place where consumers are educated on the best way possible to access healthcare services, whether it be through a doctor’s office, emergency room, urgent care center, or telemedicine visit,” he said. “Plus, telehealth is evolving to more than telephone visits. Soon, your smartphone will be a stethoscope and more.”
By fully integrating telemedicine with wellness programs, it is possible to see an improvement in chronic illness management, as well as population health management.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementTelehealth


