Clinical work leads to informatics for tech-savvy nurses

November 07, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 07, 2013 - Not too long ago, the idea of having a full-time nurse informaticist on staff was nearly unheard of.  But as information technology and the thirst for analytics permeates hospitals and health systems across the nation, the need for a dedicated informaticist to manage a complex web of data has become increasingly apparent.  After gaining a deep understanding of the clinical needs of a hospital through many years of nursing work, an interest in computers and a search for someone to guide an EHR implementation or performance improvement program leads many RNs to jump into this new field.
Informaticists do much more than just print out reports and distribute them to the mailboxes of senior leaders.  They are often in charge of the whole spectrum of health IT and quality improvement initiatives, from EHR adoption to workflow management to analytics for population health and coordinating the attestation for meaningful use.  With an intimate understanding of how clinicians work after an average of sixteen years of nursing experience, and an increasingly close association between the demands of nursing and the use of computers, handling such projects just seems like a natural fit.
“I became interested in informatics when we first went live with our EHR in 2008,” recalls Donna Kassel, MSN, BSN, RN, Informatics Nurse Specialist at Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring, Maryland.  “I was a super user at the time, and went to specialized training to function in that capacity. About two years later during a major upgrade, I was pulled out of staffing to become a trainer, and my interest was sparked, as I enjoyed teaching the EHR. I then enrolled in a graduate program in nursing informatics, and was able to secure my employment as a nurse informaticist.”
“I’ve been a nurse for twenty-five years, specializing in critical care and cardiology,” adds Audrey Funt, RN, MSN, Clinical Informaticist at the Burholme Campus of the Temple University Health System. “I took some courses in IT and project management when I went back for my master’s degree, and then I did an internship in informatics, and decided that I really liked that and it was a good fit for me.”
Dig Deeper
Administrative Support Atop Barriers to Nursing Informatics
Cancer Detection Company Gets $900M from Pharma, VC Investors
Understanding the Many V’s of Healthcare Big Data Analytics
“We were getting ready to implement a new EHR for the emergency department, and they knew I had interest in that area,” Funt continued.  “So I went onto that build and did it from the ground up.  From there, we decided to do an EHR throughout the hospital so that seemed like a natural path to follow.  Then we did the CPOE build, and they decided what they had really wanted for a long time was a clinical informaticist that would have the pulse of all of the applications, because there are so many.  It just seemed like a natural progression.”
An increasing number of nursing programs offer classes and certifications in informatics, often as part of the basic core curriculum in order to prepare students for the realities of IT work required of nurses in the modern healthcare setting.  “Nursing Informatics was a required course in my RN-BSN program at Rutgers University,” said Laurie Huryk, MSN, RN, who works as the Clinical Informatics Analyst at CentraState Healthcare System in Freehold, New Jersey.  “I fell in love with the field instantly, and pursued obtaining a position as a nurse informaticist immediately.  I love problem solving, and making things work, and that is what data analytics is all about: finding the data, analyzing it and presenting it in a format useful to the end users.”
The workforce survey data from HIMSS shows that hospitals are placing a high value on nurses who can straddle the divide between how health IT systems function and how clinical staff work on an everyday basis.  “You need someone who has clinical nursing experience and someone who also has the computer piece,” says Funt.  “It’s a little difficult to find both of those, so it really helps if you have a clinical person who can really talk the talk and walk the walk because they’ve been there.”
  Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealthcare Data AnalyticsHealthcare InformaticsNurse Informaticists


