CDPH Partners with St. Joseph Health in Cancer Data Registry

July 28, 2015

By Sara Heath
July 28, 2015 - The California Department of Public Health (CDPH) announced a first of its kind partnership with St. Joseph Health to track cancer trends around the state of California. The historic program, announced in a press release on July 27, is the first to directly and securely transmit data from a private healthcare practice to a public research entity.
CDPH officials are excited about this opportunity to partner with St. Joseph Health systems to make new strides in cancer research, saying that the new collaboration will allow for efficiency that will improve the research.
“Every second we save in sharing data gives researchers more time to spend on curing cancer,” said Karen Smith, MD, CDPH Director and State Health Officer. “This partnership is another way in which the California Department of Public Health works with the private sector and health care systems to optimize the health and well-being of the people in California.”
The project aims to improve patient care outcomes and to create more opportunities to increase the quality of life for cancer patients. By allowing physicians to report real-time diagnostic information to the California Cancer Registry (CCR), a program of the CDPH, project officials hope to accomplish those goals.
Dig Deeper
CancerLinQ Partners with FDA for Precision Medicine Studies
Artificial Intelligence Could Take Over Surgical Jobs by 2053
Henry Ford to Apply Data Analytics to Pancreatic Cancer with $20M Gift
The partnership involves the CDPH as well as a ten hospitals that are a part of St. Joseph’s Health systems, but is only growing from there. Other healthcare organizations and facilities are expected to join in the near future. The partnership also involves entities such as mTuitive and the College of American Pathologists (CAP). mTuitive states that it hopes for more partnerships beyond just St. Joseph’s Health in order to see a complete view of cancer trends around the state.
The project will change the way in which diagnostic information is stored. Before, diagnoses were stored as text within that hospital or laboratory’s database. This process of storage very much so limited the information’s uses, thus limiting cancer research.
Now the data will be coded electronically by using the CAP electronic Forms and Reporting Module (eFRM). This will make it easier to securely send data electronically to the CCR, and make it more useable for cancer research.
St. Joseph Health officials say that this use of CAP’s eFRM does more than just make data exchange more efficient.
“By using CAP eFRM, our cancer data is being sent more efficiently and immediately,” says Megan Smith-Zagone, MD, Medical Director of the Laboratory at St. Joseph’s Health, in an mTuitive press release. “Feel more confident that our cancer data is complete when sent.”
Ensure this big and complete picture of St. Joseph Health’s is crucial for ensuring a complete look at cancer trends throughout the entire state.
This project was in the works starting in January of 2014, and the first eFRM data was sent by St. Joseph’s Health to CCR in March of 2015.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical AnalyticsMedical Research


