Epic Systems Wins Best Overall Health IT Suite in KLAS Rankings

January 31, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 31, 2017 - Epic Systems has extended its “Best in KLAS” winning streak yet again after being named the top Overall Software Suite by the ranking company for the seventh consecutive year. 
The Verona, Wisconsin electronic health record and health IT giant also received recognition as the top Overall Physician Practice Vendor, and garnered top marks in eight other categories.
The company is joined by high-performing vendors across multiple categories in the 2017 Best in KLAS Software and Services breakdown.
“The Best in KLAS report celebrates and recognizes vendors who have made significant strides to improve healthcare while addressing changes like payment reform and the shift to population health,” said Adam Gale, President of KLAS.
“The KLAS team applauds your efforts and acknowledges your commitment to innovation and achievement. As the years go by, we are continually humbled by the number of providers who share their experiences with us; they make all our reports, especially our Best in KLAS report, possible.”
READ MORE: Which Population Health Companies Get Top Marks for Value?
The annual rankings cover a range of software offerings and services, including tools focused on population health management, revenue cycle management, claims and clearinghouses, and long-term care. 
Navicure, which provides cloud-based claims management and revenue cycle analytics solutions, stepped atop the podium for its claims and clearinghouse prowess.
“It’s an honor to once again be included in the Best in KLAS® report alongside the best healthcare technology solutions in our industry,” said Jim Denny, CEO of Navicure. “Best in KLAS reflects products and services that added the most value to clients in 2016, so we’re happy to know our clients recognize our dedication to making them more successful.”
In the new payer solutions segment, Verscend Quality Reporting won for best quality analytics and reporting, while the TruCare platform by Casenet, which provides care management capabilities to users, debuted as number one in its category.
“The comprehensive nature of the research completed by KLAS makes us even more honored that their independent review highlighted our clients' successes in utilizing our platform for care and population health management," said Peter Masanotti, CEO of Casenet. "We believe KLAS’s report reinforces our solution's value to our customers. When people and data work in harmony, a real, positive impact can be made on the health of individuals, populations and businesses."
READ MORE: How to Choose the Right Healthcare Big Data Analytics Tools
Meanwhile, Enli Health Intelligence was named the market leader for population health management.  The company received similar accolades from KLAS earlier in January, beating out Epic, Cerner, and other big names for its dedicated population health management expertise.
“Our promise is better outcomes for everyone,” said Jacquelyn Hunt, Enli chief population health officer. “CareManager was developed by providers for providers, so we are proud, yet humbled, to have earned the Best in KLAS award based upon their feedback. By continuing to pair technology with team-based care, Enli customers are successfully pursuing innovative delivery models and programs, while meaningfully achieving performance measures.”
KLAS also recognized specialty documentation tools, including MatrixCare’s long-term post-acute care software and Practice Velocity’s urgent care suite, for being at the top of their game.
In addition, the ranking organization gave consultancies a chance to shine in their own set of categories, including value-based care consulting and implementation leadership.  Premier Inc. received the nod for best Overall Healthcare Management Consulting Firm.
“Premier is honored to be recognized for providing valuable solutions and services to healthcare organizations as we work with them to transform care delivery in today’s value-based payment environment,” said Susan DeVore, president and CEO of Premier. “We take great pride in the fact that our members view Premier as their trusted partner in delivering high-value care and improving the health of their communities.”
READ MORE: Which Healthcare Big Data, Business Intelligence Vendors are Most Popular?
KLAS also tapped Premier for enterprise resource planning, value-based care consulting, financial improving consulting, and strategy, growth, and consolidation services.
Optimum Healthcare IT also boasted success in the consulting arena, winning best Overall IT Services Firm as well as topping the lists of best HIT enterprise implementation leaders and category leader for go-live support.
“We are honored to receive the Best in KLAS distinction from the opinions of those who matter the most – our clients,” said Jason Mabry, CEO of Optimum Healthcare IT. “Our goal is to provide our clients world-class consulting services with quality and value that deliver results. This recognition is directly attributed to the amazing staff at Optimum and their dedication to our clients. We are humbled and grateful to receive this award.”
In addition to its extensive list of market leaders, KLAS recognized NextGen Healthcare EPM, Verity Solutions, and Peak Health Solutions as “most improved” companies since the previous year’s rankings.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR VendorsEpic SystemsHealth Data InfrastructureHealth IT InfrastructurePopulation Health Management


