Infection, stroke combo 39 times deadlier to African-Americans

February 11, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 11, 2014 - African-American patients are dramatically more likely to die from a combination of stroke and an infection than their white counterparts, according to a study from the University of Michigan.  African-American patients who suffered a skin, bladder, or respiratory infection within thirty days of experiencing a stroke were thirty-nine more times likely to die than if they hadn’t had an infection, a situation that widens an already significant racial gap of stroke survival rates.
“Infection before stroke appears to be most lethal for black Americans,” says lead author Deborah A. Levine, MD, MPH, assistant professor of medicine in the division of general medicine in the U-M Medical School. “We know that African- Americans have a much greater risk of dying from a stroke than white Americans, and we wanted to know if infection – which research suggests is a stroke trigger – might contribute to this disparity.”
Seventy percent of African-American patients who died from stroke also experienced an infection, compared to just 45% of white stroke deaths.  “Because of the higher stroke mortality rate among black Americans, there has been much attention on racial differences in vascular risk factors, like hypertension, and health behaviors but less attention on acute exposures that might contribute to racial differences in stroke deaths,” Levine says.
“It is unclear why acute infection is more common, more lethal, or a more powerful trigger for stroke death in black Americans. Genetic risks, clinical, economic or environmental factors, and differences in access to health care are potential reasons,” she added. The combination of infection and stroke spells bad news for Hispanic and white patients as well, just not to the same degree.  “We need further studies to better understand this disparity so we can prevent more black Americans from dying of stroke, particularly after infection.”
Dig Deeper
Cancer Mortality Rates See 20% Drop, but Disparities Remain
Regional Variation Points Out Value of Antibiotic Stewardship
Six Pediatric Hospitals Create Personalized Medicine Coalition
The findings are particularly important in light of quality improvement programs intended to reduce hospital-acquired infections for patients.  Long-term hospitalizations that result in infections could be especially dangerous for these patients, who are already twice as likely to die from a stroke as white patients.  Approximately one in every twenty patients will acquire an infection while in the hospital, and 100,000 patients will die.  With about 20% of these infections deemed preventable, this represents a clear opportunity for hospitals to increase compliance with hygiene protocols and implement patient monitoring to catch symptoms of MRSA, sepsis, and other deadly conditions before they advance.
Tagged Healthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


