CMS Issues Last Call for ICD-10 End-to-End Testing Volunteers

May 13, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 13, 2015 - CMS has extended the deadline for healthcare providers who wish to volunteer for this summer’s final ICD-10 end-to-end testing week. 
In an email to prospective volunteers, CMS urges healthcare organizations to put in their bids to become one of 850 participants selected to partake in comprehensive ICD-10 testing during the week of July 20, the last such opportunity to engage with Medicare before the October 1, 2015 ICD-10 implementation date.
“This nationwide sample will yield meaningful results, since CMS intends to select volunteers representing a broad cross-section of provider, claim, and submitter types, including claims clearinghouses that submit claims for large numbers of providers,” the email says, adding that providers who have taken part in previous ICD-10 end-to-end testing programs may participate in July without reapplying.
Volunteer forms are available on your local Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC) website, and are due on May 22.  Organizations that are selected for the program will be notified by June 12.
Dig Deeper
Can Healthcare Avoid “Black Box” Artificial Intelligence Tools?
48% of Businesses, Including Healthcare, Face Big Data Skills Gap
Mismatched Symptoms Call EHR Data Integrity into Question
If selected, ICD-10 end-to-end testing participants must be able to submit claims with future dates of service, provide valid National Provider Identifiers (NPIs), Provider Transaction Access Numbers (PTANs), and beneficiary Health Insurance Claim Numbers (HICNs) to be used for setting up the testing program.  Providers may be dropped from consideration if they cannot provide this information by the deadline.
“Any issues identified during testing will be addressed prior to ICD-10 implementation,” the email says. “Educational materials will be developed for providers and submitters based on the testing results.”
To apply for consideration, visit your MAC website or use the CMS directory to select the organization responsible for your practice.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealth Information ManagementICD-10


