Healthcare Informatics System Aids Research Collaboration

December 30, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
The use of a healthcare informatics management system can improve collaboration between researchers and institutions.
December 30, 2014 - Developing and deploying a healthcare informatics management system for researchers collaborating across disciplines and facilities can help to improve communication, foster cooperation, and improve the way resources are shared and utilized, finds a study in the BMC Journal of Medical Informatics and Decision Making.  The Request Management System (RMS), developed by researchers at Case Western Reserve University to facilitate research through the Clinical and Translational Science Collaborative (CTSC), has helped to track more than 1500 investigators as they researched 4800 informatics and analytics tasks.
Cross-discipline research has become increasingly important as healthcare turns into a data-driven industry that relies on informatics and analytics for breakthroughs in therapies, reforms, and other advancements.  Research projects that enlist the expertise of investigators across multiple domains have a better chance of being published in peer-reviewed literature, the study says, further highlighting the need for a large-scale information management infrastructure that can help to coordinate tasks, reduce duplication, and allow researchers to apply their skills to appropriate investigations.
“Several studies have identified a lack of tools to manage and keep track of project targets and trajectories are the primary technology barriers impeding research collaboration,” the study says.  “Although researchers have pointed out the important role of collaboration for fostering new scientific discovery, currently there are still few real systems that have been developed to support the development of research collaboration.  RMS provides a solution to managing research collaboration by using a workflow engine. The workflow offers investigators an integrated informatics tool to manage the processes, contents, discussion and administration across institutions.”
Using open-source technology to develop the RMS platform allows users to access all the system’s modular capabilities through an online portal, including how-to documentation for new users, the ability to log a new project, and the capability to manage existing projects throughout their workflow.   “The modules are linked as a collaborative workflow to support streamlined user operations,” the authors explain.  Other features include the ability to tag projects with descriptions.  When the tags are placed into a frequency word cloud, they reveal that issues such as diabetes, HIV, cancer, and care quality are among the most often cited subjects.
Dig Deeper
“Big Data Spokes” Tackle Population Health with IoT, Informatics
AMIA, Dryad Partner for Healthcare Research Big Data Access
AMIA Advises PCORI on Sharing Big Data for Health Research
RMS elevates traditional web directories hosted by individual research institutions into a shared, interactive system that centralizes information management in the academic community.  The system helps to reconcile disparate workflows across organizations by streamlining the process of finding collaborators and coordinating project design.  Including such information as project length and anticipated results can also ensure that potential collaborators can commit to research opportunities and enter the project with the right expectations, the authors add.
“Without a shared management interface, researchers often feel it is difficult to identify suitable collaborators and challenging to follow up on collaboration activities,” the study concludes. “RMS addresses this problem by providing a consistent, easy-to-access web-based interface for project management and a team of core administrators to coordinate the request process to ensure quality of service. The RMS team is continuously improving the platform to provide better services and experiences for investigators and domain experts.”
Tagged Healthcare Data ManagementHealthcare InformaticsMedical Research


