Patient Engagement Isn’t Easy When mHealth Apps are Subpar

January 08, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
How can providers foster true patient engagement in an uncontrolled landscape of mHealth app adoption?
January 08, 2015 - Mobile health apps may be considered one of the key elements of a truly effective patient engagement strategy, but the unregulated and cluttered world of mHealth options makes it difficult for patients to select and stick to mHealth applications that provide true value for their health and wellness.  While the FDA is committed to keeping an eye on mHealth tools that may present an immediate risk to patient safety, consumers have been left with tens of thousands of fitness trackers, chronic disease managers, weight loss coaches, nutrition advisors, and other apps with questionable clinical relevance, poor usability scores, and little benefit to providers who are seeking better methods of ensuring patients stay well.
A new report from Applause, an mHealth quality company, shows just how fragmented and dissatisfactory the app landscape can be.  Medically-focused apps achieved an average user satisfaction score of 78 out of 100, while health and fitness tools only scored a 76.  Some of the trendiest names in mobile health and fitness, including FitBit and Nike+ Fuelband, sank to the bottom of the pool with average scores of 54 and 53, respectively, due in part to differences in user experience between the Android and iOS platforms.  Epocrates, a clinical decision support app acquired by EHR developer athenahealth in 2013, was the second-lowest rated medical app with an average score of 56.
Many of the apps that achieved the highest ratings from consumers on the medical side focus on infant care, with parenting reminders, baby feeding schedulers, and breast feeding tips making up six of the top twenty entries.  The top three health and fitness apps are menstrual cycle trackers, followed by weight loss helpers, fitness apps, and sleep-related tools.
As mHealth apps expand into what may be a $26 billion industry by 2017, healthcare providers will be facing app-happy patients with increasing frequency.  Patients may be able to tell the difference between an app that provides a good user experience and a bad one, but mHealth use does not automatically translate into patient engagement, especially when those mHealth tools do not produce the clinical value that they purport.
How can providers encourage patients to use mHealth tools that are beneficial to the patient-provider relationship without turning patients off?
READ MORE: Growing Healthcare Opportunities for the Internet of Things
Understand what patients want from the mobile experience
Providers have been dutifully implementing patient portals in order to meet the engagement requirements of Stage 2 meaningful use, but how many organizations asked their patients what they want to see from the online tool before choosing a vendor?  The ability to view personal health information isn’t always enough to satisfy consumers, especially younger patients who are used to the limitless variety of interactions available through their app stores.
Patient portals or provider-developed tools must provide measurable value to the patients who will be using them if they are to attract and maintain engagement.  That value could be something as simple as a new feature that has been missing from the marketplace, an incentive to complete a fitness goal, or a product that is just easier and more fun to use than the attempts that have come before.
“Once you actually find an app that you can use, and you use it every day to help you do something, and you find the value in it, then it has become invaluable to you.  You absolutely cannot live without it,” said Grant McLaughlin, Vice President at Booz Allen.  “That’s what we’re struggling with.  We’re seeing lots of technological inventions, but how do we add value in the context between the consumer and the provider?  If we can get to the crux of how to make the conversation between consumers and providers more valuable, and if technology can enable that, then I think we’ve struck gold.”
Recommend mHealth tools that are endorsed or created by recognized healthcare authorities
READ MORE: Claims Data Analytics Show Diabetes Has Third Largest Health Impact
mHealth is the Wild West of health IT at the moment, but as the desire to use these tools continues to grow, so does the number of options available from recognized medical organizations, large healthcare systems, and tech giants with solid reputations and vast development resources.
While the debate over the role of physician societies in endorsing mHealth continues, companies such as Apple, Samsung, and Google, as well as EHR developers working in tandem with Silicon Valley superstars, may start to outshine basement-dwelling developers cranking out 99-cent moneymakers with questionable value.
Promote direct communication with providers through patient portals
For those providers who still aren’t convinced that mHealth apps purchased on a whim can bring much to the table – or those concerned that an overwhelming number of mobile options will keep patients away from the portals that will help organizations meet their 5% patient engagement threshold for meaningful use – stressing the utility of direct communication with providers may be beneficial.
“Physicians just aren’t having that dialogue,” says Tamara St. Claire, Chief Innovation Officer of Commercial Healthcare for Xerox.  Direct communication with physicians, nurse practitioners, or care coordinators through online messaging can help patients be sure that they are getting informed answers to their health questions from trained professionals.  It can also make sure that providers understand what is on their patients’ minds and what issues to address during their next clinical visit, all while helping to meet the Stage 2 mandate.
READ MORE: How Soon Will Healthcare Connect Machine Learning with Consumers?
“People really want to hear [about patient portals] from their physician, because they’re that trusted source,” St. Claire added.  “Even as medicine is changing, having that talk with the physician is probably going to have the most impact.”
Tagged Accountable CaremHealthPatient Engagement


