Healthcare analytics essentials: Hiring the data scientist

December 05, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 05, 2013 - What’s bright red and sits at a desk all day?  A data scientist who was just told his job is the sexiest career of the 21st century.  While a non-descript cubicle in the administrative wing of the hospital might not seem like it will change the world, informaticists, health information managers, and statisticians are quietly revolutionizing the way healthcare operates, one spreadsheet at a time.  An essential member of the healthcare analytics team, data scientists are wildly in demand but difficult to find, leaving hospitals begging for qualified professionals able to translate reams of raw clinical and financial data into actionable insights in real-time.
Despite a growing reliance on information technology in hospitals and physician offices, the search for staff capable of dealing with the nuances of software development, maintenance, and manipulation remains an arduous process for the HR department.  Providers remain deeply concerned about their ability to find applicants with the right mix of mathematical, clinical, and communication skills to fill an increasingly high number of vacancies.
Recent surveys note that 75% of organizations are actively searching for new staff, but 62% are concerned about being able to fill the role.  HIMSS Analytics found that half of organizations have put projects on hold due to unfillable openings, even as 2.5% of all healthcare job listings are focused on clinical informatics, EHR implementation, and big data opportunities.  PwC estimates that there will be a shortage of 50,000 qualified health IT workers by 2015, partly due to the fact that healthcare organizations don’t always know exactly what they’re looking for.
Data science as a concept may be nothing new, but few universities have dedicated programs that graduate students with a badge that says “clinical analytics wizard” and a resume chock full of big data competencies that may not even have existed when they were freshmen.   Informaticists and HIM professionals often grow organically as nurses and other clinical staff gain technical skills over decades of hands-on work.  These workers might not have a title or a sting of letters after their names that necessarily reflect these skills, so organizations need to dig deeper into accomplishments instead of certificates.
Dig Deeper
UnitedHealth Supports Bundled Payments with Health Data Analytics
NIH Concludes In-Depth Genomic Data Analysis of 33 Cancer Types
Data Analytics, PDMP Use Can Combat the Opioid Crisis
“It’s more qualification, not necessarily certification,” says JoAnn Klinedinst, CPHIMS, PMP, FHIMSS, Vice President for Professional Development at HIMSS. “Do they have the skills, tools, and resources to succeed in the environment they’re being hired into? Employers are very particular about whom they want to invest in and the particular skill sets. Sometimes it takes a lot of work to find that person who may not have the level of experience that one’s looking but may have the components that make him or her highly desirable.”
For hospitals onboarding a data scientist, these desirable components are fourfold: mathematical savvy, programming skills, a degree of clinical familiarity, and strong business intelligence in order to be able to use the data to truly understand the organization’s goals and drive them forward.  Employers also need to make sure that the applicant’s skills match what IT systems the hospital has on hand, not just what they hope to implement in the future.
“A lot of organizations have a mismatch between the talents that they could be hiring and the technologies platforms that they have in place,” David Smith, data scientist and vice president of corporate marketing at Revolution Analytics, said to Forbes. “As their analytics platform, many organizations have legacy systems in place from the mainframe era, but data scientists have grown up in an environment of open source software and open data APIs, so this creates a real mismatch.”
With healthcare facing an onslaught of reforms that all rely on the collection and manipulation of data to boost quality, save money, and continue getting paid, the data scientist will become the lynchpin for any hospital’s analytics plan.  Hiring managers must understand the potential of data analytics and the particular needs of the organization before ever bringing a data wrangler on board.  The shortage of workers and the astronomical demand for such professionals may make it difficult to take that first step, but without someone to crunch the numbers, hospitals will be unable to move forward into the big data era at all.
Tagged Healthcare Data Analytics


