PCMH Wins HIMSS Davies Award for Population Health Management

May 11, 2015

By Kyle O'Leary
May 11, 2015 - Patient-centered medical home (PCMH) Grove Medical Associates has been selected as the 2015 HIMSS Ambulatory Davies Award of Excellence. The prized award selects organizations that have best exemplified EHR-enabled improvements and achieved key industry milestones. According to the HIMSS Davies Award website, the winner of the award receives perspective on key organizational growth as well as guidance on influencing IT to increase revenue, quality of care, and patient safety.
The challenge for small ambulatory practices, such as Grove Medical Associates, often includes meeting compliance goals while improving care quality. A key reason for Grove Medical Associates’ selection for the award was the implementation of eClinicalWorks. Since implementing an eClinicalWorks EHR in 2005, the technology helped unify practice management to improve the quality of patient care, streamline workflow, and generate a 315 percent return on investment.
Jonathan French, Director of Quality and Patient Safety at HIMSS gave a great congratulatory reference when he said, “The alignment of technology, people, and process at Grove Medical Associates has resulted in improved care for their patients.  The Davies Committee and HIMSS congratulate the team members of Grove Medical Associates on improving the health outcomes of their patient population through the effective use of health IT.”
Dr. John E. Kelly, primary care physician at Grove Medical Associates, explains that “Grove Medical Associates focuses on a team approach to providing comprehensive health care in a high-quality and cost-effective manner.” Kelly also emphasized the fact that implementing electronic health records allowed the organization to see more patients per day, add health services, and maximize insurance incentives. The adoption of an online patient portal has also helped to improve Grove Medical Associates population health management.
Dig Deeper
Machine Learning to Fuel “Collective Intelligence” of Human Dx Project
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Humana Pins Social Determinants of Health to Better Quality of Life
Grove Medical Associates will be recognized at the 2016 Annual HIMSS Conference & Exhibition which is being held from February 29 to March 4, 2016 in Las Vegas, NV.  For more information on applying for the HIMSS Davies Awards of Excellence, visit the HIMSS Davies Award website.  
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


