mHealth supports diabetes, heart health in rural populations

November 15, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 15, 2013 - With cardiovascular disease accounting for 48% of all deaths worldwide, heart health is a lot more than just a local population health management initiative for a single hospital to explore.  It’s a problem that requires broad, intensive, coordinated effort across the healthcare continuum, and yet comes down to an individual’s daily choices about what to eat and how much to move.  As providers look for tools to help encourage and manage these choices, mHealth pops up again and again as a way to get individuals right where they live, and has been shown in a new study published in BMC Public Health to be effective in supporting heart health and metabolic wellness for rural populations.
The provisional study summary found that regular exercise, prescribed as a tailored regimen by a primary care physician and supported by an mHealth app,  could reduce the risk profile of cardiometabolic syndromes in users drawn from a rural community with a greater-than-average prevalence of obesity, diabetes, and hypertension but a less-than-average ability to easily access healthcare.  149 volunteers with at least two significant risk factors were divided into two groups.  One cohort received nothing more than instructions to complete exercise and a paper journal to log activity, while the other were given heart monitors and a smartphone equipped with an mHealth app to record their activity and support their efforts.
“Following the eight-week intervention, waist circumference, diastolic blood pressure and total cholesterol were reduced, physical activity and fitness were increased, and autonomic function was improved,” the study concludes. “Furthermore, participants reported that the technology assisted in adopting new practices to improve wellbeing and did not take too much time or interfere with activities of daily living.”  Patients that kept up with the program after the end of the study continued to see health benefits from their efforts.  The team acknowledges that since the study consisted of volunteers, the subjects were already highly motivated to make lifestyle changes, and the findings may not exactly translate to a wider population of patients.
However, the study does add to the ongoing effort of researchers interested in developing a solid body of evidence for the effectiveness of mHealth as a population health management tool.  mHealth and telehealth have long been a vital lifeline for rural populations,  and have also shown promise in reaching a wide cross-segment of the population, from low-income minorities to veterans to the urban middle class.  As rulemakers and providers work together to devise new strategies to combat heart disease and improve overall health, these technological tools may take on an increasingly significant role in reaching individuals on a personal level through their smartphones.
  Tagged EHR Patient DataMedical ResearchmHealth and Population HealthPatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


