Humana, United Hospital Form Accountable Care Agreement

December 23, 2014

By Stephanie Reardon
Humana, Inc. and United Hospital System will enact a new three-year Accountable Care agreement and partnership, effective January 1, 2015.
December 23, 2014 - The rising cost of health care is often at the forefront of the challenges that providers face each year. In a bid to combat this problem Humana, Inc. and United Hospital System will enact a new three-year Accountable Care agreement and partnership, effective January 1, 2015.
The partnership aims to enhance healthcare coordination, improve quality of care and drive down costs for members in southeast Wisconsin. The partnership will also offer more personalized care and a broad range of health population management tools like predictive analytics, chronic disease management and wellness programs.
“Over the past several years, more and more retirees living in the communities that United Hospital System serves have selected Medicare Advantage plans,” said Ric Schmidt, President, CEO and General Counsel of United Hospital System. “The partnership between United Hospital System and Humana will allow our outstanding team of physicians and professional healthcare workers to provide excellent patient care to the growing number of retirees who select Humana Medicare Advantage plans. This partnership is clearly in the best interest of all parties, most notably our patients.”
The agreement between Humana, Inc and United hospital system will also utilize data from National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS) and use the suggested treatment methods from this data in order to provide more quality treatment outcomes.
Dig Deeper
CMS Equity Plan Promotes Data Analytics, Population Health
What is the New Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Program?
MA Medicaid Embraces Accountable Care, Population Health Models
“The Accountable Care model is changing the way we and our physician partners manage patient care and promote wellbeing,” said Bruno Piquin, Humana Senior Markets Vice President, Northern Division. “We are continuing to establish these value-based partnerships nationwide because we know they work and we’re already witnessing their impact on how health care is delivered.”
Tagged Accountable CarePopulation Health Management


