MA Grants Fund Health Information Exchange, Care Coordination

June 09, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 09, 2015 - Healthcare organizations in Massachusetts looking to improve their care coordination capabilities through the development of improved health information exchange infrastructure will have an opportunity to receive up to half a million dollars from the Massachusetts eHealth Institute at MassTech’s Connected Communities Implementation Grant Program.  The funding will help strengthen regional health IT bonds that foster population health management, better communication between providers, and the potential to engage in big data analytics. 
“The Connected Communities Grant Program provides us with an opportunity to support impactful health IT programs driven by the priorities in individual communities,” said Laurance Stuntz, Director of MeHI in a press release emailed to reporters. “Through this approach, our hope is to receive proposals that identify region-specific roadblocks to sharing information, engage a broad cross-section of healthcare stakeholders, and address the unique needs of patients in that community through the use of technology.”
The program will focus on integrating specialty providers and community services into the primary care continuum by seeking out proposals that forge stronger connections between public organizations such as schools, children and family services, or criminal justice systems.  Physician practices, health plans, hospitals, and other providers will be eligible to apply for the funding, which will be disbursed over a two-year period to between five and eight project teams.
Grantees will need to reach four major milestones to receive additional funding after submitting a transformation plan that includes a program budget and detailed framework for creating or leveraging health information exchange pathways.  Accepted transformation plans will then move to the development and testing stage before deploying care coordination prototypes, tailoring provider workflows, and meeting established volume targets. 
Dig Deeper
Identifying Big Data Sources for Population Health Management
CT Medical Society Announces New Health Information Exchange
New Epic Systems EHR, Big Data Features Zero In on Interoperability
“Finding ways to improve information sharing and real-time data capabilities, while enhancing providers’ ability to treat patients at the community level, will go a long way toward helping the Commonwealth meet its health care cost reduction goals,” said David Seltz, Executive Director of the Health Policy Commission. “We look forward to continuing our work with MeHI and other stakeholders to build a stronger health care system.”
“The Connected Communities program is a unique opportunity to encourage innovative ideas and partnerships for care coordination,” added State Senator James T. Welch. “I look forward to watching the progress as the grant process unfolds and I am eager to learn about the exciting projects that the grantees will roll out.”
Initial pre-application materials are due on July 1, 2015, followed by a full application deadline of August 20, 2015.  An informational webinar will take place on Wednesday, June 10 at 12:00 PM Eastern time.  For more information and access to the full grant solicitation, please click here.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureCare CoordinationHealth Information Exchange


