HIM, Revenue Cycle Management Metrics to Watch before ICD-10

February 23, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 23, 2015 - Health information management professionals and ICD-10 steering committees are looking forward to a complicated year in 2015 as ICD-10 appears to be headed for implementation in October.  The new code set will have a significant impact on a number of different critical areas of operations for healthcare organizations, ranging from revenue cycle management to EHR optimization to clinical analytics and data warehousing.
With so many balls to juggle, and so many dollars on the line, it’s no wonder that ICD-10 preparation has been one of the most difficult and worrisome mandates to ever hit the industry.
Healthcare providers are deeply concerned about how ICD-10 will affect their claims processing, revenue collection rates, and coder productivity, and there is no shortage of gloomy predictions about how ICD-10 is going to play out.  In order to truly understand how the increasingly complex code set will change a provider’s revenue cycle and efficiency, however, organizations must collect baseline data now.
What metrics are important to collect before ICD-10 goes live in order to ensure that providers have a solid grip on what they will be facing after October 1, 2015?
ICD-10 preparation and implementation costs
READ MORE: Leveraging Business Intelligence for Healthcare Management
The ICD-10 preparation period has been so lengthy and convoluted that it may seem difficult to include all possibly related costs in a single list.  The estimates for expenses related to the major areas of implementation, including clinical documentation improvement, software and EHR upgrades, testing, and coder education, have ranged from a few thousand dollars to several million.  While most providers will likely fall somewhere in between, it’s a good idea to keep a running tally of expenses in order to truly understand where money is being well spent.
According to a report published in the Journal of AHIMA last fall, specific areas of spending to calculate may include:
• Costs for coder and physician education, such as money spent on securing seminar speakers or consultants, training books, and teaching software.
• Health IT infrastructure upgrades and purchasing, including computer assisted coding (CAC) tools, clinical documentation improvement aids, EHR and billing system changes, and technology changes identified after testing.
• Expenses incurred by coder and physician training. If training takes place during regular working hours, organizations may wish to include lost man-hours in the equation.  Dual coding is suggested as a highly effective way to provide coders with critical practice time, but the drag on productivity may end up costing providers more than they initially anticipate.
READ MORE: Healthcare Financial Analytics, Business Intelligence Market Takes Off
Coder productivity and accuracy
While physicians have a responsibility to provide clean, complete, and accurate clinical documentation to the admin department, billers and coders have been at the center of the ICD-10 debate for years.  Good revenue cycle management depends on consistent and accurate coding of claims, and in most healthcare organization, the claims processing cycle is very delicately balanced.  One of the reasons ICD-10 has become such a scary proposition for the industry is the anticipated disruption to productivity of coders who may need to spend additional time on inaccurate ICD-10 codes that produce rejected claims and a lack of checks in the mail.
It’s a valid concern, if the international experience is anything to go by.   In 2012, AHIMA revealed that Canadian coders never quite reached their pre-ICD-10 levels of productivity after implementing the new codes in 2002.  While inpatient coders were completing 4.62 charts per hour pre-implementation, ICD-10 cut that number in half to 2.15 during the first few months.  One year later, coders were still only completing 3.75 charts per hour.
American coders have faced similar challenges, with one study showing an 82 percent decline in productivity for coders learning the ropes of ICD-10.  That number also rebounded after some intensive practice time, as did the accuracy of the selected codes.
Experts commonly tell providers to expect at least a 60 percent decrease in productivity immediately after the transition, but organizations that don’t have a firm grasp on coder behavior under ICD-9 will be unable to effectively calculate what that drop will look like and how it will truly impact their finances.
READ MORE: Providers Struggle with Time, Tools for Revenue Cycle Analytics
First pass rates and denial rates for claims
Another revenue cycle metric to consider is what happens to claims once they leave the coders’ hands.  Payers may be facing similar troubles with applying the rules of ICD-10 to incoming documents, and may also be slower to process their data.  As cash flow slows, some providers may be faced with shrinking margins and the unpleasant reality of dipping into emergency funds or lines of credit just to stay solvent until the crisis passes.
A new revenue cycle management report from NextGen Healthcare notes that the average claim spends 35 days in accounts receivable (A/R), and that 35% of physician practices experience a first-pass clean claim rate of just 70 to 80 percent.  Community health centers were most vulnerable to low first-pass rates, with 44 percent admitting that they fell on the lower end of the scale.  Ideally, providers would experience 30 days or less in A/R and a clean claims rate of 90 percent of higher.
Only four percent of practices believe their ability to submit electronic claims as “excellent,” the report found, and just one in ten think they sufficiently check every their paid claims to ensure that they’re being reimbursed accurately.  As ICD-10 takes hold, this number will need to increase dramatically if healthcare organizations wish to profit from one of the new code set’s most important benefits: the sue of ICD-10’s specificity to produce more accurate, more appropriate payments for services.
Not only should organizations develop a detailed understanding of their revenue cycle by collecting baseline data on denial rates and acceptances, but they should engage in end-to-end testing with their payers in order to make sure that they are including all necessary claims elements in accordance with ICD-10 standards.  Comprehensive testing is the only way to adequately prepare for the predicted impacts of ICD-10 and develop a meaningful contingency plan before it’s too late.
Tagged Healthcare Business IntelligenceICD-10Revenue Cycle Management


