What is the role of nurse informaticists in healthcare analytics?

October 07, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 07, 2013 - When discussing the challenges and opportunities of health IT, physicians often take center stage as the face of the provider organization.  But nurses are equally important in the search for better technology, better data, and better ways of serving patients through EHRs, information exchange, and analytics.  In fact, hospitals are clamoring for nurse informaticists who specialize in reducing data errors, formulating strategies for more comprehensive population health management, and translating the results of analytics algorithms into improved patient care in the consult rooms and on the wards.
Every nurse must be increasingly competent in the IT applications that are taking over hospitals and offices, says Dr. Susan Sportsman RN, PhD, ANEF, FAAN in an essay for Nursing Informatics & Technology. “Using EHRs, nurses can now look across patient populations, sort and group patients by specific characteristics, advise on evidence-based diagnoses, treatments and interventions, and measure progress in real-time.”
“With information systems that function much like airplane or automobile dashboards, nurses can identify which patients have booked appointments in the previous one-to-three months, along with those who may not have booked appointments in two years or more,” she continues.  “Among those patients who fail to return for follow-up care, nurses can identify which have diabetes, along with those diabetics who would probably benefit from specific health interventions. Nurses can access similar intelligence for patients with other conditions, including asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), congestive heart failure (CHF), asthma, or metabolic syndrome.”
Nurses with no special information technology training can access these analytics if a hospital has focused on delving into its patient data, but informaticists can take data to the next level by working throughout the healthcare system to bring a critical eye and extensive clinical experience to the development and deployment of population health management tactics and financial and clinical analytics infrastructures.
Dig Deeper
Physician-Level Data May Not Reduce Opioid Prescription Rates
EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
As of 2011, a HIMSS survey reports that the majority of nurse informaticists were employed by the largest organizations, including health plans, hospital systems, academic centers, or consultants and vendors, collecting between $501 million and $1 billion in revenue a year.  Most hold master’s degrees in healthcare informatics, and 46% spent at least 16 years as a registered nurse in a clinical setting before transitioning into their current roles.
Systems development and implementation is the most common task for a nurse informaticist, whether that means EHR adoption or helping organizations develop the infrastructure necessary to join a health information exchange (HIE) or patient-centered medical home (PCMH).  Evaluating, customizing, and updating in-house systems to address quality and productivity issues also formed a significant part of the workload, marrying a nurse’s experience with the ins and outs of daily patient care with all its shortcuts and frustrations with the knowledge of how data must flow to produce actionable reporting on population health and organizational risks.
“A rapidly aging population and a sharp increase in patients who suffer from three or more chronic conditions will fuel the demand for nurses who can manage the health of populations in medical homes or other population-based health programs,” says Sportsman.  “Technology will be invaluable in helping nurses to monitor, anticipate and respond to patients’ health needs. Equally important is using technology to collect, interpret and evaluate data on measurable outcomes of care, including quality, cost, cost savings, emergency department and hospital utilization and disease management and improvement.”
  Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceEHR AnalyticsHealthcare AnalyticsNurse InformaticistsPopulation Health Management


