Tailored Web-Based Tools Boost Population Health Management

April 12, 2016

By Jacqueline LaPointe
April 12, 2016 - According to a recent study by the Journal of Medical Internet Research, tailored web-based interventions for multiple health behaviors can help healthcare providers achieve population health management goals.
Researchers found that individuals who used a web-based computer-tailored intervention system to self-report physical activity and consumption of a healthy diet were able to develop long-term behavioral changes that would reduce their risk of cardiovascular diseases.
The study revealed that self-regulatory mechanisms, including planning and self-motivation, contributed to long-term intervention success.
“Our results for the hypothesized mechanisms are important because they point toward the potential target constructs of Web-based interventions and how to make such interventions more efficient,” wrote the authors of the study. “It is imperative to address self-efficacy and planning to enable individuals to develop habits and translate intentions into behaviors.”
Dig Deeper
$335K Grant Supports Chronic Disease Management for Lupus
Addressing Opioid Abuse with Analytics, Population Health Strategies
CMS: Patient-Centered Care Strategies Can Combat Opioid Abuse
Using data from patients in Germany and the Netherlands between 2013 and 2015, the study enlisted individuals to take part in an eight-week, internet-based educational program focused on cardiovascular disease and risk prevention.  The intervention provided dietary and physical activity guidelines, and also gave participants the ability to record self-assessments of their progress.  
Patients who completed the intervention program reported that they were more likely to eat more fruits and vegetables and participate in more physical activity than patients in the control group. Participants also reported increases in self-motivation and planning skills.
The findings indicated that planning was a stronger predictor of habit strength than self-efficacy. Individuals who planned more maintained healthier habits and further reduced their risk of cardiovascular diseases.
Healthcare providers can draw on this study to develop individualized care plans that account for self-regulatory mechanisms rather than cues to action, such as medical advice or prescribed treatment. The study indicates that patient engagement through self-assessment is key to achieving population health goals.
Before implementing tailored web-based interventions, however, healthcare providers should be aware of the high dropout rate associated with this population health management study. The researchers suggested that future projects should employ social media to bolster participation in population health management initiatives.
Nonetheless, the study is a step towards developing better population health management tools using modern technology and behavioral health strategies. Researchers intended to show how to easily connect and engage patients to help them transition to a healthier lifestyle.
“Practical implications can be retrieved from the fact that habit-strengthening resources for plans and self-efficacy boosters can be delivered briefly via the Internet, are easy for people to implement, and theoretically have the potential for longer-term impact,” wrote the authors of the study.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementEHR and Patient EngagementPatient Centered CarePopulation Health Management


