Survey: Patients embracing home health, data analytics, HIE

December 11, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 11, 2013 - Healthcare is on the right track with its push towards data analytics, population health, and information sharing, according to the Intel Healthcare Innovation Barometer survey.  Patients are eager to embrace remote monitoring, a greater role in their own care, and systems that share and analyze their personal health information in order to improve their overall wellness and reduce the strain on themselves and the healthcare system when interacting with providers.
The survey, which polled 12,000 patients across eight countries, shows “very high willingness of people to become part of the solution to the world’s healthcare problems with the aid of all sorts of technologies,” according to Eric Dishman, Intel fellow and general manager of the company’s Health and Life Sciences Group. “Most people appear to embrace a future of healthcare that allows them to get care outside hospital walls, lets them anonymously share their information for better outcomes, and personalizes care all the way down to an individual’s specific genetic makeup.”
More than 70% of respondents would be interested in using smart prescription bottles and internal monitors small enough to swallow in order to keep track of their health, with 84% willing to share the deidentified results with providers and researchers if it could help lower the overall costs of healthcare or their medications.  More people were willing to share their EHR data than their banking or phone call records.  Surprisingly, senior citizens are about 10% more likely to contribute their health information to research databases than their grandchildren.
That may be due to the fact that patients anticipate a great deal more home care in the future, which is less of a pressing concern for the younger generations.  More than half of participants believe traditional hospitals will be a thing of the past in the next few decades, with home health, telehealth conferencing, and self-administered tests taking the place of regional medical centers.
Dig Deeper
Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Big Data Analytics Fuels Penn State Precision Health Research
Half of patients would trust a test they personally administered as much as one their physician provided, the survey reports, including blood pressure monitoring and other basic vitals.  A third of respondents feel confident in their ability to self-administer an ultrasound.  Patients are also overwhelmingly willing to take part in telehealth consults, and many would trust a diagnosis delivered over the internet as much as if it occurred in person.
“Care must occur at home as the default model, not in a hospital or clinic,” said Dishman. “New technologies can bring decision support, health monitoring and health coaches into the home. It was also interesting to see that people in emerging markets such as Brazil, China and India trusted themselves to use health monitoring technologies more than those in more technologically advanced economies such as Japan and the United States.”
“Improving healthcare is a team effort, including patients and their families,” he added. “Intel’s research shows when people see benefits for them and their wider community, they are open to sharing sensitive information in anonymous ways.”
Tagged Health Information ExchangePatient CarePatient DataPatient EngagementQuality Of CareRemote Monitoring


