AMGA: Data fragmentation is “inadequate” for accountable care

August 13, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 13, 2014 - The widespread lack of healthcare data transparency is one of the most significant barriers preventing a meaningful transition to accountable care and a data-driven healthcare ecosystem, says the American Medical Group Association (AMGA) in a letter to lawmakers.  In order to achieve lower costs, improved quality, and useful clinical analytics, healthcare organizations and government agencies must embrace truly transparent data reporting and allow access to information about the quality and cost of healthcare services.
“Healthcare data, and its transparent use, has the potential to better educate the consumer/patient and drive significant change and improvement in the delivery system,” writes Donald W. Fisher, PhD, President and CEO of the AMGA to Senators Ron Wyden (D-OR) and Chuck Grassley (R-IA). “Already, the publishing of healthcare data around quality and cost measures is causing healthcare providers to rethink how they deliver care, focus on patient outcomes, and manage populations of patients.”
“However, transparency is not as transparent as it seems,” Fisher adds. “Currently, data is fragmented among provider, payer, and government silos, and often jealously protected.”  While the industry was able to limp along under these circumstances with the fee-for-service model, it is “completely inadequate” in a pay-for-performance ecosystem where providers are accepting financial risk for patient care across a continuum that includes many different business partners.
The use of clinical analytics and business intelligence software to identify gaps in care, flag opportunities to reduce waste and contain spending, and improve the quality of patient safety demands a cooperative flow of robust data to all stakeholders, Fisher says.  Through the spread of EHRs, providers can now electronically transmit an enormous wealth of information to clinical repositories and health information exchanges that can aid in developing risk scores, new care protocols, and care coordination programs.
Dig Deeper
48% of Businesses, Including Healthcare, Face Big Data Skills Gap
Mismatched Symptoms Call EHR Data Integrity into Question
Can Point-of-Care Analytics Change the Healthcare Equation?
“Analytics are key in identifying patients at risk of hospital admissions, emergency department visits, and most in need of primary care follow-up after an inpatient discharge,” Fisher explains. “Data assists medical group service lines to identify areas that need improvement or have significant treatment patterns that diverge from evidence-based guidelines. This information allows medical groups to develop new care protocols and design improved order sets within the EMR. Collection and analysis of healthcare information results in better quality scores and, often, lower costs.”
In order to achieve these goals, industry stakeholders must focus on the standardization of data in order to develop universal quality rankings that can help consumers make better choices about their own care.  “Without an apples-to-apples comparison system, consumer interpretation of the data is literally left up to the imagination of the reader, making a truly informed choice challenging at best,” the letter notes.
“The transparent reporting of healthcare data has the potential to improve the healthcare delivery system and create an educated patient/consumer,” Fisher concludes. “Transparency is in its infancy, and there is understandably much confusion surrounding the data. However, this is the right direction to pursue and by allowing providers to access all forms of data and by standardizing the data submission process, Congress has the opportunity to dramatically improve the quality measurement system for patients and providers.”
Tagged Accountable CareClinical AnalyticsHealth Information Management


