ACC: Care Coordination Vital for Chronic Disease Management

June 24, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 24, 2015 - Policymakers and healthcare providers must focus on improving strategies for comprehensive care coordination if they are to make headway against the rising tide of chronic disease, says the American College of Cardiology (ACC) in a letter to the Senate Finance Committee obtained by HealthITAnalytics.com. 
Patients with multiple co-morbidities require more robust management from their primary care providers and specialists, which must integrate patient engagement technologies like remote monitoring to address their complex needs.
Writing in response to a May request for feedback from chronic disease management experts, ACC President Kim Allan Williams, Sr., MD, PACC, FAHA, FASNC joins other organizations like CHIME in providing several suggestions for the Chronic Care Working Group.  The comments revolve around the pressing need for financial and policy changes that support a closer working relationship between providers across the care continuum.
“The ACC supports models of care that emphasize interdisciplinary care, provider communication, and coordination, notably the patient-centered medical home (PCMH), community health teams, and accountable care organizations (ACOs),” Williams writes. “The College supports such models and their emphasis on strengthening the capacity of primary care.”
“However, we strongly urge the working group to acknowledge the importance of specialty care and the critical role of specialty physicians in these models. We cannot emphasize enough that for a patient with multiple chronic conditions (MCC) whose major condition is cardiovascular, the cardiologist is often best suited to manage the patient and coordinate care with other physicians.”
READ MORE: Amazon Scoops Up PillPack in Possible Population Health Play
Specialists have often complained of being left out of major healthcare reform initiatives that are more focused towards the needs of primary care providers, such as the EHR Incentive Programs.  Williams urges Congress to consider new guidelines that “explicitly acknowledge the need for specialists such as cardiologists to be able to coordinate care in models like the PCMH or an ACO. Rigid adherence to exclusively primary care centered models risks providing sub-optimal care for complex patients with chronic condition,” the letter asserts.
Value-based reimbursement structures have the potential to make better care coordination for chronic disease management a reality, the ACC continues, by incentivizing providers to focus on overall outcomes of patients with complex needs.  The newly designed MIPS program is a good start, Williams says, but Medicare and other payers must prioritize additional cost-saving strategies that aid chronic disease patients, like the more effective use of prescription drugs and a heavier reliance on telehealth and remote monitoring to manage ongoing health.
“The future of telehealth will focus on bundled payments and offering the same quality of service in a less costly package,” the letter predicts. “Medical specialty societies can play a vital role in determining which patients are appropriate to be monitored by telemedicine and which are not. Heart failure and rhythm management are two areas in the cardiovascular space that are prime candidates for telehealth. Proper reimbursement for providing this service is essential in order to incentivize clinicians to use the technology.”
Promoting patient engagement through the greater use of technology will align well with emerging reimbursement frameworks, the ACC says, and the quest to integrate the patient’s voice into his or her own care shouldn’t stop there.  Providers should be sure that they are asking the right questions about advanced planning and end-of-life directives to patients living with multiple chronic conditions, Williams writes, in order to avoid unnecessary or inappropriate treatments in the long-term.
“Training non-palliative care physicians and advanced practice clinicians in advanced care planning is another approach to alleviate this problem,” suggests the letter. “Members of the cardiovascular care team should be able to provide their specific area of expertise to a patient, e.g. a patient with heart failure and/or at risk of sudden cardiac death. Providers of cardiac services can reduce costs by working closely with primary care physicians to define parameters. A mechanism needs to be developed to facilitate work in conjunction with the primary care physician.”
READ MORE: CDC Works to Improve Public Health Data Analytics, Surveillance
Patients should feel empowered to engage in their own chronic disease management, Williams concludes, if they are to make cost-effective, positive treatment decisions.  “Education and information must be provided to these patients in a format that is easily understandable and translatable, particularly in situations where there is shared decision making with medications,” he writes.
“Empowering patients to measure and transmit their condition by creating ongoing feedback with the clinician is also very important. This could include remote sensors, home laboratory testing, even something as simple as managing anticoagulants with atrial fibrillation.  The College believes involving patients in an evidence-based decision-making process is the best way to improve outcomes while providing the highest value.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureChronic Disease ManagementPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


