PCCI, UTSW get funding for clinical translational research

January 08, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 08, 2014 - Non-profit research center PCCI and the University of Texas Southwestern have announced $30 million in funding to advance their work in clinical translational research provided by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), and the National Science Foundation (NSF).  The two organizations will collaborate on efforts to enhance national language processing and predictive analytics modeling across the healthcare industry.
Ruben Amarasingham, MD, MBA, president and CEO of PCCI and associate professor of medicine at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, will serve as Director of the Biomedical Informatics Program.  “We’re incredibly excited by these grants that look to improve clinical care through the application of carefully conducted health services and informatics research,” he said.
“I am thrilled to have Dr. Amarasingham as the leader of the UTSW CTSA Biomedical Informatics Program,” said Robert Toto, MD, Associate Dean for Clinical and Translational Research and Director of the Center for Translational Medicine at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.  “He brings a wealth of experience and expertise in developing and implementing innovative informatics science approaches—such as natural language processing and predictive modeling—to solve real-world problems in healthcare.  His leadership and passion for team science make him the perfect person to lead this critically important component of our Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA) program.”
Amarasingham will also serve as the director of the Applied Medical Informatics Cluster for a new AHRQ funded Center for Patient-Centered Outcomes Research.  PCCI will help coordinate the center’s efforts to develop predictive readmissions algorithms based on EHR data.  The work will compliment other PCCI analytics projects such as a partnership with Children’s Medical Center in Dallas, TX intended to flag potential readmissions for pediatric asthma patients and facilitate data sharing between providers and community service agencies.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical InformaticsClinical IntelligenceEHR AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceMedical Research


