Johns Hopkins, UCSF, Stanford to join FDA innovation center

May 13, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 13, 2014 - Move over, Lena Headey: there’s another CERSI coming to town.  Undoubtedly more genial and altruistic than the popular Game of Thrones character, the FDA’s Centers of Excellence in Regulatory Science and Innovation (CERSI) will begin to leverage the scientific know-how of The Johns Hopkins University and a joint partnership between the University of California San Francisco and Stanford University to promote improvements in clinical evaluations, public education, and dietary sciences, writes Stephen M. Ostroff, MD, the FDA’s Acting Chief Scientist, in a blog post for the FDA Voice.
CERSI has been in operation since 2011 with centers at the University of Maryland and Georgetown University, forming a “part of FDA’s effort to promote a vibrant, collaborative, regulatory science culture that enables us to tackle the scientific challenges presented by breakthroughs in medical product development and to improve food safety and quality,” Ostroff writes.  The programs at Johns Hopkins will focus on three key areas of the FDA’s strategic mission: clinical evaluations, social and behavioral science, and food safety.  UCSF and Stanford will work with the FDA to develop courses and workshops in drug development and regulatory science.
“In addition to a strong foundation of collaboration with the Agency, our partnership with the FDA will leverage many other institutional strengths,” said G. Caleb Alexander, MD, MS, associate professor of Epidemiology and Medicine and co-director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Drug Safety and Effectiveness. “These include internationally renowned scholarship in regulatory science; innovative training through online platforms harnessing modern technologies; a nimble and organic operational approach; and the potential for self-sustaining programs that will continue to serve the FDA’s strategic mission beyond this award.”
Ultimately, the work will help the FDA to clearly communicate the importance of food safety to the general public, as well as promote healthy lifestyle habits and help consumers understand the nuances of healthcare delivery and regulation in order to aid patients as they navigate the healthcare system.
Dig Deeper
Machine Learning Identifies Ovarian Cancer with 91% Accuracy
AMA, Patient Groups Join “All of Us” Precision Medicine Outreach
Six Pediatric Hospitals Create Personalized Medicine Coalition
“Collaborating with our academic partners is crucial to our ability to expand the scientific foundation and infrastructure FDA needs to deliver on the promises of using 21st century science and technology to fulfill our regulatory mission,” Ostroff says. “They also enable FDA to bring its expansive experience to academia, ensuring that the new scientific approaches being developed at these institutions can be applied in a way that increases their usefulness for evaluating FDA-regulated products.  Most importantly, patients and consumers will ultimately benefit from the investment.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsClinical IntelligenceHealthcare AnalyticsMedical ResearchPopulation Health Management


