Internet of Things, Precision Medicine, NLP Drive Market Growth

October 09, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 09, 2015 - Healthcare’s big data analytics investment opportunities are continuing their meteoric rise as the Internet of Things, precision medicine, population health management, and accountable care encourage the growth of health IT tools that can connect disparate data sources, help providers deliver quality care, and secure patient engagement.
Market segments that provide foundational technologies for these activities are slated for significant growth until the end of the decade, according to a series of reports and predictions, as healthcare organizations begin to make major upgrades to their digital health infrastructure.
North American health IT market to reach 104.3 billion by 2020
Overall, the North American marketplace for health IT software tools including PACS, CPOE, mHealth, telehealth, revenue cycle management, and big data analytics capabilities is slated to be worth more than $104 billion by 2020, increasing at a 13.5 percent compound annual growth rate (CAGR) over the next five years.
Dig Deeper
“Data Lake as a Service” Enables Internet of Things, Precision Medicine
ONC: Artificial Intelligence Has Potential to Reshape Healthcare
Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
The continued pressure of regulatory requirements, including Stage 2 and Stage 3 meaningful use, are likely to keep pushing the market upwards, according to the report from MarketsandMarkets.
A separate report by Research and Markets reflects similar growth opportunities for the health IT market globally, flagging major technology providers such as Allscripts, IBM, Apple, Cerner, and GE as prime players in the e-health game.  Other drivers of the global marketplace include wearable devices, smart fabrics, and sensors related to the Internet of Things.
North America holds the largest share of the global e-health marketplace, which is expected to grow at a CAGR of 14.56 percent during the next few years.
Natural language processing projected to become a $2.67 billion opportunity
Natural language processing is poised to become a major force in the healthcare and life sciences industries as providers seek more efficient and comprehensive methods of leveraging unstructured data from their electronic health records.
Research and Markets predicts that the NLP market will expand from $1.1 billion in 2015 to $2.67 billion in 2020, representing a CAGR of 19.2 percent.  Dividing the market into three segments – rule-based, statistical, and hybrid NLP technologies – the report adds that machine learning, interactive voice response, optical character recognition, and text analytics are current hotspots for the technology.
$5.5 billion healthcare big data analytics market to grow at a 24.82 percent CAGR
There’s no question that healthcare big data analytics is one of the most lucrative and quickly growing technology opportunities worldwide.  Current leaders in the field, including IBM, Oracle, Inovalon, McKesson, Truven Health Analytics, and Humedica, Inc. will continue to drive major growth in the big data analytics segment, producing a staggering 24.82 percent CAGR until 2022.
The market will be worth $32.4 billion globally by that time, with North America leading the way.  Financial analytics, clinical analytics, operational analytics, and predictive analytics will continue to be key areas of investment for healthcare organizations seeking the tools to help them remain competitive in a rapidly changing environment.
Focus on precision medicine brings growth to stem cell, clinical trial markets
Stem cell banking services and supplies for clinical trials are both likely to see significant expansion as researchers and healthcare providers invest in precision medicine activities.  Transparency Market Research predicts that the global stem cells market will see a 24.2 percent CAGR until 2018, resulting in $119.52 billion in value.
The clinical trial supplies market, which includes logistics, manufacturing, packaging, and therapeutic areas, will see a 7.1 percent CAGR to reach $1.2 billion by 2020.  MarketsandMarkets adds that phase III trials are likely to bring the biggest opportunity to supplies as research into oncology, cardiovascular disease, respiratory diseases, blood disorders, and infectious diseases continues.
Healthcare brings major opportunities to Internet of Things investors
Healthcare is quickly becoming one of the most active verticals in the global IoT marketplace, which is slated for explosive growth over the next five years.  The worldwide market for IoT devices and chipsets is expected to see a CAGR of 49.3 percent until the end of the decade, reaching a value of $49.9 billion, according to Reportlinker.
Body-worn temperature sensors, such as those included in wearable devices for fitness and chronic disease monitoring, will be worth $93.4 million by 2020 all by themselves, says Transparency Market Research.  These sensors may also have applications in the infant and child wellness markets as parents seek passive, continuous monitoring solutions for their children’s health.
Previous reports have also predicted that biometric sensors and other IoT technologies are likely to see significant growth in the next few years.  By 2024, Tractica indicates that biometric technologies integrated into EHRs could be worth $12.5 billion.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHealthcare Internet of ThingsPrecision Medicine


