Study: Pancreatitis patients should be screened for cancer

February 28, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 28, 2014 - Patients with acute pancreatitis may benefit from a screening for pancreatic cancer after a study found mounting evidence for a link between the two conditions.  Banke Agarwal, MD, of Saint Louis University used EHR data from patients in the Veterans Health Administration to determine an increased number of pancreatic cancer diagnoses in those who had previously been treated for pancreatitis.  One and a half percent of pancreatitis patients older than 40 were later diagnosed with one of the deadliest forms of cancer compared to .13% of those who had no prior complaints.
“Our study demonstrates that there is a much higher risk of pancreatic cancer in patients with acute pancreatitis than commonly believed,” Agarwal said.  “As a point of reference, it’s useful to consider that the relative number of patients with acute pancreatitis who are subsequently diagnosed with pancreatic cancer is greater than that of cancer discovered during colonoscopy screening.”
Only 4% of patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer survive for longer than five years, due mostly to the fact that the disease is generally symptom-free until its very late stages.  At the time of discovery, fewer than 20% of cases are still localized enough to benefit from surgical removal, but even this intervention is often not enough to help patients long-term.
Agarwal’s research found that 12.1% of patients with cancer had an episode of acute pancreatitis before the diagnosis, with patients older than 70 experiencing nearly four times the risk of cancer than those between 40 and 50.  More than half of cancer diagnoses were made between three and 24 months after treatment for acute pancreatitis, indicating the benefits of screening patients at that time with the use of an esophageal ultrasound.
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
AMA, Patient Groups Join “All of Us” Precision Medicine Outreach
While the treatments for pancreatic cancer are few, catching the disease early enough to make headway with surgical intervention could give patients an edge over the fourth most common cause of cancer death in the country.  Physicians have not yet agreed upon a standardized method of screening, Agarwal notes, but flagging acute pancreatitis as a condition likely linked to the development of cancer could provide the foundation for an organized attack on this unforgiving illness.
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsClinical DataClinical IntelligenceMedical ResearchPatient Data


