Are Healthcare Providers Interested in Precision Medicine?

January 21, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 21, 2016 - Precision medicine may not be capturing the healthcare industry’s collective imagination quite as completely as President Obama might hope, according to a new survey by Health Catalyst. 
While some pioneering researchers and providers have started to make progress in the fight against cancers and rare diseases by investing in big data analytics and next-generation genomic sequencing technologies, others aren’t sure what these futuristic strategies will bring to the average non-academic healthcare organization.
Few healthcare organizations without a specific research and teaching orientation are going out of their way to adopt precision medicine technologies and programs any time soon, the survey found. 
Fifty-nine percent of respondents overall said that precision medicine was not likely to play a major role in their organizational roadmap within the next five years.  Among non-academic medical centers, that number rose to 68 percent.
"We live in a remarkable era of information, when all that is known about a person—from family history and genetics to location history and environment—can be balanced against all that is known in the medical domain,” said David Crockett, PhD, Senior Director of Research and Predictive Analytics for Health Catalyst.
READ MORE: CancerLinQ Brings Big Data Insights to Oncology with FDA, NCI Partners
“This big-picture view of medical decision making can allow providers to focus both prevention and intervention on appropriate individuals, while avoiding unnecessary costs and unwanted side effects for those patients who wouldn't benefit."
But not everyone is getting caught up in the moment, as providers continue to struggle with basic requirements for financial solvency, such as the EHR Incentive Programs, value-based reimbursement contracting, and ongoing health IT development. 
Academic medical centers were significantly more likely to express enthusiasm over the potential for precision medicine to become a major feature of everyday care.  While just 33 percent of non-academic providers said that genomics and tailored, personalized treatments were likely to play a “very significant” role in the future of medicine, 71 percent of academic organizations envisioned a starring role for these therapies.
Academic hospitals and health systems were twice as likely as other providers to state that they already have plans in place to integrate precision medicine into their care delivery strategies.  Nearly two-thirds of academic providers are already prepped for the genomics scene, compared to just 29 percent of other providers.
The majority of non-academic providers don’t appear to be very interested in developing plans to integrate genomics into their care regimens, either.  Twenty-two percent said that DNA sequencing was “completely irrelevant” to their patient treatment strategies.  A further 39 percent said that it was “slightly irrelevant.”  Only 4 percent of non-academic organizations think that gene sequencing will be a very relevant part of future efforts, compared to a whopping 36 percent of academic institutions.
READ MORE: Healthy Nevada Study Combines Genomics, Population Health
"The disconnect between the recognition that genomics holds great promise and yet the lack of preparation for precision medicine may reflect the fact that technology adoption is often driven by research efforts at major academic medical centers, with others following in their footsteps," Crockett said. "This survey shows that leaders in academic medicine are already moving to adopt precision medicine, but the rest of healthcare has a lot of catching up to do.”
The survey did not share data on why specific organizations felt that precision medicine was not top of mind for most hospitals and health systems, but there may be a clue in their responses to a question about integrating genomic information into their EHRs. 
Seventy-one percent of non-academic providers said that they have no intention of bringing genomics into the electronic health record.  In stark contrast, sixty-four percent of academic medical centers said that they already have a strategy in place to add key precision medicine elements into their EHRs.
An old, familiar story may be impacting the development of these new capabilities.  Smaller organizations, many of whom are still struggling with foundational EHR optimization tasks and the onerous journey of developing data warehouses and other big data analytics technologies, might simply lack the time, manpower, and budget to give precision medicine adequate attention.
And while the cost of DNA testing has plummeted from tens of thousands of dollars to less than $1500 per patient, few insurers will currently reimburse providers for the tests, which makes the business case for further technological investment a flimsy one, at best.
READ MORE: Gates Invests $50M in Big Data, Precision Medicine for Alzheimer’s
Academic medical centers, meanwhile, often host clinical trials and research programs that may already receive funding from external sources.  If researchers are already producing genomic data and gathering large-scale information on patient outcomes, it would seem foolish not to spend a little extra in order to harness these rich sources of big data for the use of their clinicians.
Many early advances in precision medicine have indeed taken place in the academic arena, although the national Precision Medicine Initiative hopes to democratize access to genomic big data by creating open source repositories for collaborative research. 
As the Precision Medicine Initiative evolves, and more proof of its value to patient care emerges, healthcare organizations across the care continuum may become more likely to view genomics as a valuable tool for producing precise, high-quality, personalized patient results.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig Data AnalyticsMedical ResearchPrecision Medicine


