Population health management lowers employer healthcare costs

September 16, 2014

By Sponsored Content
September 16, 2014 - As healthcare evolves in the electronic age, the methods for improving its delivery across populations are also evolving. The growth of Population Health Management (PHM), Electronic Health Records (EHR) and mobile applications have combined to enable informatics specialists to use health care analytics to mine both clinical and claims data to establish best practices related to treatment, prevention and even self-care. Data mining through PHM can also help stakeholders reduce the amount of abuse, fraud and waste found in the $2.7 trillion healthcare industry to maximize dollars spent while improving delivery of care and health outcomes not only for individual patients, but population subsets, as well.
The overarching goals of PHM through information gleaned by data mining are simple to define, but more complex to employ: discovering what works and identifying what needs to be changed. The benefits of such in-depth analysis extend to all stakeholders within the healthcare industry to include patients, providers, insurance companies, policymakers and employers.
No longer confined to public health clinicians, PHM seeks to deliver positive health outcomes to groups of individuals. Its goals include distributing positive outcomes within groups while also reducing inequities in vulnerable populations. The approach takes medicine beyond the boundaries of the individual by seeking to address such factors as resource distribution, social structure and environment. It has already proven itself a useful application in disease management programs.
Society determinants are an important aspect of PHM since they play such a large role in promoting good health. These factors include such determinates as where people are born, how they grow up, where they live and work, their age and the systems available to them for dealing with health, wellness and illness.
2 Forms of Healthcare Analytics
READ MORE: How Big Data Analytics Underpins Every Healthcare Trend
Informatics specialists working to develop and improve PHM systems will generally focus on two basic forms of healthcare analytics. The first involves real-time analytics, or the clinical data provided at the point of care that affect prescriptive decision-making during patient encounters. Real-time systems rely on two or more pieces of patient data to help formulate case-specific advice. The second form of analytics involves batches that are able to retrospectively evaluate population sets. For example, they delve into patient records within a large medical system or through claims data from a particular population.
Population Health Management’s Role
To fully understand PHM, it is important to understand what it is, what its limitations are and where collaborative efforts that reach beyond healthcare must come into play. Population health has been described as the overall health outcomes for groups of people to also include the distribution of said outcomes among those within the group. There are, however, a multitude of factors that can affect those outcomes that reach well beyond the scope of a medical practice. They include public health initiatives, social and environmental forces, such as employment, income, education and culture, the physical environment, individual behaviors and genetics.
While individual medical practices cannot address every factor on their own, those interested in PHM can help manage personal behaviors in a measured, systematic way. They can also work directly with other resources, such as schools, local organizations and public health agencies, to improve the health of the populations they are responsible for.
Within individual practices, Practice-Based Population Health (PBPH) can be put into action. This offshoot of PHM can occur on a smaller scale when practices put specific information management functionalities into action. The main functionalities PBPH focuses on are:
READ MORE: Big Data Analytics, Population Health Top Executive Priority List
• Identifying patient subpopulations to include those patients who require specific preventative care, tests or other treatments.
• Examining detailed characteristics of the identified subpopulations.
• Creating reminders for providers and patients that can be made actionable.
• Tracking performance measures so clinicians can see how they are performing compared with national guidelines and/or peer groups.
• Making data available in multiple forms for better analysis.
Shaping Healthcare in the Workplace
Employers and employees alike are seeing the benefits of PHM in action as risks are reduced and workplace wellness programs swing into action to improve employee health while lowering employer costs. The consulting firm Aon Hewitt estimates a potential savings of as much as $700 per employee when PHM is used to target any three of eight pinpointed behaviors that are known to contribute about 80% to the number of cases related to chronic illness. These factors include diet, lack of exercise, smoking, lack of health screenings, improper amounts of sleep, excessive alcohol intake, poor standards of care and improper stress management.
As employers see the health and financial benefits of PHM, more are anticipated to begin adopting analytical approaches because of the potential it brings for adding value to the purchase of health services while also increasing accountability.
“Health care analytics have become as essential to effective management as financial data are to business,” Helen Darling, CEO of the National Business Group on Health points out.
READ MORE: Clinical Decision Support May Boost ID of Chronic Kidney Disease
Meeting the Growing Needs
As more stakeholders discover the value of PHM, the need for data management professionals to develop and run the necessary infrastructure is growing. Health informatics is already one of the fastest-growing segments of the healthcare industry, and the demand is only increasing as the need for efficient and effective systematic data collection, storage and management systems becomes evident.
While current EHRs serve their purpose, they are not designed for PHM or for interoperability with other systems. Highly skilled health informatics specialists are required to not only develop systems that meet the needs of PHM, but also to overcome challenges in gathering patient data, implementation of Health Information Exchanges and other tools that can advance not only PHM, but overall patient care and outcomes.
PHM is lowering employer healthcare costs, but more work needs to be done. As this practice for improving outcomes while lowering costs comes into its own, the field requires talented professionals on the cutting edge of analytics to drive it forward.
Ron Vatalaro works at Bisk Education with the University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine and writes about health informatics. Ron holds an advanced degree in Business Administration with a concentration in technology.
  Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHealthcare AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


