CDC: Nearly 28% of American diabetics are undiagnosed

June 11, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 11, 2014 - While the fact that 9.3% of Americans are now afflicted by diabetes is a worrying new statistic, perhaps even more concerning is that 27.8% of those patients are undiagnosed and untreated, according to the Center for Disease Control’s (CDC) newest diabetes report.  The findings from the most recent year available, 2012, indicate that 1.7 million new diabetes cases occur in adults each year, with 25.9% of patients 65 or older currently dealing with the chronic disease.
“These new numbers are alarming and underscore the need for an increased focus on reducing the burden of diabetes in our country,” said Ann Albright, PhD, RD, director of CDC’s Division of Diabetes Translation.  “Diabetes is costly in both human and economic terms. It’s urgent that we take swift action to effectively treat and prevent this serious disease.”
In 2010, diabetes was the seventh leading cause of death in the United States, but that figure may be underreported, the CDC says.  Only a third of patients with diabetes had the disease listed anywhere on their death certificates, and less than 15% had it listed as the underlying cause of death.  Since diabetes can lead to heart attack and stroke, which can be fatal, these conditions are more often blamed for the deaths of diabetic patients instead of the disease itself.
Patients of African-American, Hispanic, and American Indian/Alaskan Native descent are twice as likely as white patients to be diagnosed with the condition, although the percentage of patients with pre-diabetes is similar across ethnic groups, hovering between thirty-five and thirty-nine percent.  Eighty-six million adults currently fall into the category of pre-diabetic, and between 15% and 30% of these patients will develop type 2 diabetes within five years.
Dig Deeper
97% Say Big Data Analytics Crucial for Healthcare Benefit Choices
HHS Taps 8 States for Behavioral Healthcare Integration Demo
Incomplete Population Health Data Exacerbates Care Disparities
The burden on the healthcare system from the diabetic crisis is enormous, with $176 billion per year in direct costs and an additional $69 billion in indirect costs like work loss, premature death, and disability.  Only 3% of patients do not require insulin or oral medication to manage their blood glucose, while 11.9% are taking oral medication only.  Three percent use both methods, while a similar number rely solely on insulin to regulate their health.
An industry-wide focus on preventative care such as weight loss for pre-diabetics and diagnosed diabetics, as well as eye screenings, foot care, and hypertension management, is attempting to lower the incidence and complications of the disease, but the report shows that the healthcare system has a long way to go.
  Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical IntelligencePopulation Health Management


