How to develop a clinically integrated network in 5 steps

December 12, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 12, 2013 - While a mature analytics infrastructure can significantly boost the quality of care within a hospital, the data is meaningless if it can’t be communicated efficiently, effectively, and in a timely matter to partners across the care continuum.  Hospitals are increasingly responsible for what happens before and after a patient resides within its walls, and the need for better cooperation with primary care and specialist physicians is leading to the development of clinically integrated networks (CINs), which turn hospitals into a hub of education and organization for a multi-faceted care team.
In a case study of Flagler Hospital in St. Augustine, Florida, consulting firm PYA outlines the five basic steps leading to the formation of the CIN that helps executives, physicians, and hospital resources work together for quality care.
Education
Healthcare reform and a shift towards pay-for-performance reimbursements are changing the way providers operate in a rapid and often confusing way.  Providing staff physicians with education on the financial and clinical impacts of accountable care helped pave the way at Flagler, a non-affiliated 335-bed acute care hospital, for an understanding of the importance of integration.  The hospital made it clear that declining revenues due to competing facilities was threatening the way Flagler did business, and showed physicians and leadership teams that working together could mitigate the problem better than trying to go it alone.
Dig Deeper
Alarm Fatigue, Health IT Woes Top ECRI 2017 Patient Safety List
Big Data Shows Gender-Based Medical Error, Patient Safety Patterns
How Patient Safety Organizations Encourage Data Collection, Quality Care
Commitment
After forming a clinical integration committee stocked with physician champions to lead the way, Flagler committed to the financial and cultural changes necessary for the CIN to succeed.  Executive leadership allowed the physician groups to take the lead and form a series of workgroups focused on identifying what the hospital and its partners needed to do and how much it would cost.
Organization
The workgroups focused on teasing out the details in five key areas: they developed a governance structure for the physician-hospital organization (PHO) that would operate the CIN, defined a process to establish high standards for quality care and communication, identified the technology necessary to support improved information exchange and population health management, devised a staff education and recruitment strategy, and outlined financial projections for the first three years of the CIN’s operations, including expenses and income derived from shared savings.
Design
To complete the design, the hospital enlisted the help of subject matter experts to support the processes defined by the workgroups and presented a variety of options to the steering committee.  With Flagler’s health plans demanding a quick shift to pay-for-performance reimbursement, the committee took time to consider the requirements of its payers as they moved forward.  The tight timeline imposed by the payers “turned into a blessing rather than the anticipated curse because it kept all parties intensely focused on the process,” the paper notes.  The hospital and its partners were able to bring the CIN into its final implementation phase within an impressive nine months from start to finish.
Implementation  
After spending weeks hammering out the details, the First Coast Health Alliance (FCHA) was incorporated and filed its application to participate in the Medicare Shared Savings Program as an ACO.  In addition to helping the hospital’s physicians and partners communicate better and cut costs by focusing on quality care, FCHA developed and deployed a wellness program for the local school district to launch the first of its population health management programs.  With 200 physicians on board, a dedicated executive director, and a series of finalized policy documents, FCHA was on its way to bringing better care to its community.
Future projects for the CIN include a focus on analytics and data exchange to reduce readmissions and boost quality, exploring opportunities for bundled payments, building a patient-centered medical home (PCMH) program, and incorporating remote patient monitoring and transition of care strategies to help patients on their journey to health.
After completing the process of launching FCHA, “physicians who previously had shared little economic or clinical interests built consensus around a detailed plan to operate a CIN in partnership with each other and the local hospital, with which they had little to no pre-existing business relationships,” the paper concludes.  “The hospital and community physicians became educated about coming changes to the healthcare payment and delivery system, and then accepted the challenge to improve quality and enhance efficiency through collaboration.”
Tagged Hospital QualityPatient CareQuality Of Care


