Sen. Alexander Teases “Most Important” Precision Medicine Bill

May 05, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 05, 2016 - The Senate HELP Committee (R-TN) is working on a piece of precision medicine legislation that may be the “most important bill Congress considers this year,” Senator Lamar Alexander (R-TN) said in a press release this week, noting that the potential companion to the landmark 21st Century Cures bill would “affect virtually every American.”
Alexander, a vocal proponent of improving the nation’s healthcare information technology infrastructure and fine-tuning programs like meaningful use, has also taken precision medicine to heart.
In an address to three Tennessee City Chambers of Congress, Alexander recounted the story of a Nashville resident with severe macular degeneration whose participation in a precision medicine trial led to the restoration of his sight.  After personalized cell therapy, Douglas Oliver was even able to regain his driver’s license eleven years after giving it up due to blindness.
"The bill I am working on will create a breakthrough path for new medical devices, help the FDA attract talented researchers and reduce administrative burdens on researchers,” Alexander said. 
Dig Deeper
21st Century Cures Act Clears Senate Hurdle on the Way to Vote
21st Century Cures Act for Precision Medicine Set for House Vote
NIH, Pharma Orgs Launch $215M Precision Medicine, Cancer Project
“That will help more Americans access cutting-edge cures like Tennessean Doug Oliver did.  It’s a remarkable story but it’s just one story and there are millions of other Americans who could be helped if we complete the work that we set out to do.”
The HELP Committee has been instrumental in bringing the wide-ranging 21st Century Cures bill into being.  The legislation, which passed the House with a 344 to 77 in July of 2015, would add more than $14 billion in funding to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and FDA to bolster medical research and clinical trials.
The bill would also complement the big data collection efforts of the Precision Medicine Initiative by establishing a national data repository focused on disease surveillance and research.
Alexander is hoping that his unnamed companion bill, which synthesizes fifty bipartisan proposals passed by the health committee, will receive the same high level of support as the 21st Century Cures Act, which he urged his fellow lawmakers to pass quickly.
“In 10 years, the head of the National Institutes of Health predicts we'll have a universal flu vaccine, hearts rebuilt from a patient's own cells, and real treatments for Alzheimer's. These are just a handful of the many stunning breakthroughs in biomedical research that can be accelerated and delivered to more American patients if Congress passes a 21st Century Cures bill into law this year."
Lawmakers on both sides of the aisle have expressed enthusiastic support for the growing precision medicine ecosystem, joining developers, healthcare providers, and members of the research community to launch the PMI program earlier this year at an industry summit.
The NIH has already unveiled plans to start building the PMI Cohort, a collection of data samples from one million volunteers that will provide the big data backbone required for researchers to dig deeper into the genetic roots of many serious conditions.
The HELP Committee’s new companion legislation would require researchers who use NIH funds for their work to share their data with other members of the research community, and would also focus on improving the interoperability of electronic health records to facilitate data collection and sharing.  The bill would also provide clarification for patients who are unsure of their rights to access their personal health data.  
In addition, Alexander is working on a bipartisan NIH Innovation Projects Fund, which would deliver a one-time injection of funding for certain precision medicine priorities, including the PMI, the National Cancer Moonshot, and the BRAIN Initiative.
The Senator is hopeful that legislators will agree on an acceptable financial figure for the project, especially since the House was so willing to commit $8.8 billion to similar NIH priorities in the 21st Century Cures Act.
“We continue to work to find an amount that the House will agree to, the Senate will pass and the president will sign,” he said.
Dig Deeper
Top 5 Basics to Know About the Precision Medicine Initiative
What's in the 21st Century Cures Act for Precision Medicine?
Tagged 21st Century Cures ActMedical ResearchPrecision MedicinePrecision Medicine Initiative


