Smartphone Owners Five Times More Likely to Use Patient Portals

September 04, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 04, 2015 - Smartphone users are significantly more likely to be patient portal users than consumers that do not own internet-connected mobile devices, says a new report by Parks Associates.  Twenty-seven percent of smartphone owners regularly engage with patient portals compared to just five percent of non-owners.
"Monthly usage of patient portals is increasing among US broadband households, but 50 percent of US broadband households do not regularly use these online health resources and 23 percent do not use health portals at all," said Harry Wang, Director of Health and Mobile Product Research at Parks Associates.
"Device ownership can be a driver for online engagement, and innovations with open or private APIs are enabling partners from different industries, such as device makers and patient portal developers, to collaborate for new consumer health and wellness experiences.”
Patient portal use has become a battleground for clinicians attempting to attest to Stage 2 meaningful use.  Providers have experienced significant difficulty getting five percent of their patients to view, transmit, or download their online data, due to a combination of factors including poorly designed technologies, complicated sign-up procedures, and a lack of awareness among patients and providers alike.
Dig Deeper
Meeting the Challenge of Healthcare Consumerism with Big Data Analytics
Gaps in Chronic Disease Care Leave Patients, Docs Frustrated
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
The issue has become so divisive that CMS is currently considering cutting the five percent objective and replacing it with the requirement that only one single patient must access a patient portal within the organization’s reporting period. 
Patient surveys, however, generally show an eagerness to access online health data and communicate through email and secure messaging with their providers.  One recent study from the Journal of General Internal Medicine found that 46 percent of patients would like the opportunity to send online messages to their healthcare team, but only seven percent of patients had actually done so. 
Provider reticence to take on the added responsibility of online messaging may play a part in this concerning disconnect, said study author Joy Lee, PhD, MS, a Johns Hopkins School of Public Health post-doctoral fellow.  “The medical establishment needs to figure out how best to incorporate this reality into their practice while properly ensuring security safeguards,” said Lee. “This is an area where there is significant patient interest, but institutions and health care providers haven’t caught up.”
As smartphone use spreads to previously unconnected segments of the patient population, including low-income consumers who may be at a higher risk of ignoring primary care and chronic disease management due to the costs of an office visit, mobile devices represent an important opportunity for providers to foster engagement in a patient-friendly way.
"Rising expectations among consumers for a more retail-like, high-touch, and relevant experience online will drive the most meaningful and successful connected health solutions," said Keith Epstein, Senior Strategic Advisor, AARP. "Consumers will have more engagement in their own care and choices, and connected health solutions will need to deliver a high level of personalization to guide and inform individuals facing a complex healthcare system, financial constraints, and future risk – difficult personal decisions involving all aspects of their well-being."
"We have to forge new partnerships if the healthcare industry is to realize the benefits of connectivity," added Kevin Meagher, SVP Business Development at ROC-Connect. "Building simple, affordable, and scalable solutions is a challenge, but it is possible. It will deliver huge benefits to both consumers and the healthcare industry."
Tagged Patient EngagementPatient SatisfactionPopulation Health Management


