Predictive analytics, patient engagement captivate start-ups

July 08, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 08, 2014 - The patient engagement, population health, and clinical analytics markets seem to hold nearly endless possibilities for innovation and experimentation, fostered in large part by digital health accelerator programs, or entrepreneurial boot camps for the bright-eyed and business-savvy.  As healthcare providers and patients alike demand more intuitive and technology-driven tools to promote wellness and manage chronic diseases, digital accelerators are giving promising apps and devices a chance to strut their stuff – and significant amounts of funding to bring the best ideas to the consumer market.
Health 2.0 and Pilot Health Tech NYC have announced their 2014 winners, as has The Iron Yard in South Carolina, with a combined 20 start-ups dedicated to predictive analytics, increased connections between patients and providers, mHealth applications, and accountable care.  The eleven New York City winners will share a total of one million in seed funding for their proposals, while each of the nine Iron Yard selectees will receive $20,000 to bring their ideas to life.
Here are some of the winning start-ups from both programs:
Hindsait and the New York Blood Center will partner to pilot Hindsait’s predictive analytics platform that assigns a potentiality score for prospective blood and plasma donors, allowing administrators to target motivational messages to those most likely and most eligible to participate. (Pilot Health Tech NYC)
Dig Deeper
Artificial Intelligence a “Low Priority” for Healthcare Orgs in 2018
Are Clinical Trials Diverse Enough to Ensure Patient Safety?
Penn Med. Population Health Analytics Dashboard Wins ECRI Prize
The Accountable Care Coalition of Greater New York will implement a medication adherence program developed by AllazoHealth, with a special focus on engagement for intellectually and developmentally disabled patients.  The program will help to provide metrics on the impact of patient interventions and the cost savings associated with improving medication adherence. (Pilot Health Tech NYC)
Hats Off Tech will further develop its mobile platform that connects cancer patients with caregivers, providers, and health navigators in order to improve care coordination and outcomes. (The Iron Yard)
Intention Technology will use its seed money to fine-tune its predictive algorithms that help to diagnose diseases such as pneumonia and coronary artery disease. (The Iron Yard)
Tactonic Technologies and the NYU Rusk Rehab Center will use pressure imaging sensors and associated software to measure the gait and balance of rehab patients in order to prevent falls and reduce the risks of injury.  (Pilot Health Tech NYC)
Recovr’s virtual therapy apps will leverage the popularity and relatively low cost of the Xbox gaming system to provide intensive rehabilitation games for stroke patients, giving them the opportunity for interactive play and recovery activities. (The Iron Yard)
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsPatient EngagementPredictive Analytics


