NIH Awarded HIMSS Stage 7 for Clinical Data Sharing, EHR Use

August 03, 2015

By Sara Heath
August 03, 2015 - The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Center was recently recognized for its excellence in clinical data collection and EHR use. The clinic received a Stage 7 award on the HIMSS Analytics Electronic Medical Record Adoption Model (EMRAM), according to an NIH statement, making it the first federally-funded clinic to do so. NIH received this highest level HIMSS award by completely eradication its paper medical record use, and streamlining its EHRs by making use of Allscripts Sunrise platforms.
According to a HIMSS statement, of the 5,400 hospitals in the HIMSS US database, only 3.7 percent of them have received the stage 7 award, showing just how prestigious an award this is for NIH. Stage 7 awardees have accomplished a complete shift to EHRs, have used the data collected in those EHRs to analyze patterns and improve quality of care, and have made their systems interoperable so to further the exchange of clinical data.
NIH used Allscripts Sunrise to power its Clinical Research Information System (CRIS), according to CNN Money. In addition to supporting the clinic’s clinical databases and EHRs, Allscripts Sunrise is responsible for powering other systems used in advanced patient care.
Allscripts executives say that this award proves just how great of a research clinic NIH truly is.
Dig Deeper
Using Visual Analytics, Big Data Dashboards for Healthcare Insights
EHR Analytics Track C. Diff Patients to Flag Infection Trends
EHR Data, Machine Learning Create Cost-Based Clinical Pathways
“As the first federal health organization to reach Stage 7, the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center has demonstrated its commitment to using technology to conduct critical health research programs and drive improved patient health worldwide,” said Allscripts President and Chief Executive officer Paul M. black. “Reaching Stage 7 is a testament to the superior quality of care this organization provides.”
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsEHR AnalyticsQuality Of Care


