Study: HACs as defined by CMS do not represent true impact

June 13, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 13, 2014 - A new study in the American Journal of Medical Quality uses ICD-9 codes to identify the top hospital-acquired conditions (HACs) that adversely impact patient mortality, length of stay, and the costs associated with in inpatient admission, but differs from current CMS guidelines on what constitutes an HAC.  The study, sponsored by healthcare quality consultant Premier, Inc., flags acute renal failure, hypotension, respiratory failure, and sepsis as the most common potential inpatient complications that cost money and lives, and expands the scope of hospital-acquired conditions far beyond what CMS targets in its quality improvement programs.
“It’s very important to zero in on complications that could have a large, simultaneous impact on multiple measures, including reimbursement,” said Sharon L. Powell, MS, RN, patient safety officer & director, performance improvement at Frederick Memorial Hospital in Maryland.  The top ten conditions identified by the study account for nearly $2.5 billion in annual costs, 24,000 potential mortalities, and 920,000 additional hospital days across 530,000 cases, the researchers found.
While CMS has made HAC prevention a top priority for quality improvement, the study finds that CMS’ measures may not fully define the impact of hospital-acquired conditions on inpatient care.  The research team found that 16% of patients experienced a complication on Premier’s list of HACs, while less than 1% of patients experienced an HAC as defined by CMS.  The study’s events were associated with higher mortality rates, higher costs, and significantly longer lengths of stay than the CMS criteria.
Eight of the CMS measures occurred so infrequently that researchers could only find fewer than 50 cases of each among the 5.5 million patient records they surveyed.  CMS HACs accounted for 2% of total deaths, 13% of total costs, and 12% of total added days.
Dig Deeper
Decision Support, Big Data Analytics Reduce Hospital Blood Use
CA Children’s Hospitals Win Davies Award for Analytics, Safety
KLAS: Epic Systems, Cerner Lead EHR Vendors in Sepsis Analytics
“While the safety measures tracked through federal programs should be a focus for hospitals, identifying improvement areas across this set of complications is just as important to deliver more efficient, higher-quality care overall, said Richard Bankowitz, MD, Premier’s chief medical officer.  The team will be conducting additional research to “better identify the drivers of complications and how they could be prevented,” he added.
The top ten conditions as identified by the study are: acute renal failure, hypotension, respiratory failure, sepsis and bacteremia, aspiration pneumonia, acute myocardial infarction, gastrointestinal ulceration and hemorrhage, cerebral infarction, pulmonary embolism, and ventilator associated pneumonia.
Tagged Healthcare QualityHospital QualityPatient Safety


