84% of Docs Say CMS Makes Clinical Quality Improvement Harder

October 28, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Overly complex clinical quality improvement reporting requirements are frustrating providers while sapping time and resources, MGMA says.
October 28, 2014 - Eighty-four percent of healthcare providers don’t believe that Medicare clinical quality improvement programs have any significant impact on the way they provide patient care, according to a new MGMA survey, and the myriad reporting requirements may even be distracting providers from their essential care duties.  While the vast majority of providers are engaging in clinical quality improvement programs on their own, regardless of federal initiatives, dissatisfaction with the way CMS collects clinical data for quality measures is widespread and growing stronger.
Between the Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS), EHR Incentive Programs, and the Value-Based Payment Modifier Program, providers are required to report their progress on different measures in slightly different ways, which can be time-consuming and difficult for administrative staff.  Three-quarters of providers who participated in MGMA’s survey believe that the complexity of the quality reporting structure has a negative impact on their practice’s resources.  Eighty-four percent reported a negative impact on efficiency and clinician morale, while 93% noted frustration among administrative support staff.
“Medicare has lost focus with its physician quality reporting programs. Instead of providing timely, meaningful, and actionable information to help physicians treat patients, this has become a massive bureaucratic reporting exercise. Each program has its own set of arcane and duplicative rules which force physician practices to divert resources away from patient care,” said Anders Gilberg, MGMA senior vice president of government affairs, in a press release.
The concern is growing as 2015 rapidly approaches.  Next year will be the first time that physicians will be subject to financial penalties for unsuccessful reporting, which can add up to as much as 11% of a practice’s Medicare reimbursements.  As more providers also start to make the jump to Stage 2 of meaningful use, with its increased levels of EHR use and higher levels of patient engagement, population health management, and health information exchange, healthcare organizations have a great deal at stake.
Dig Deeper
Geisinger, Baylor Granted $3.5M for Patient Safety Learning Lab
EHR, Lab Data Support Pediatric AKI Analytics Dashboard
How Big Data Velocity Informs Population Health, Patient Safety
CMS has made certain efforts to simplify the administrative burden of its quality reporting structures, but 2015 is still slated to be a difficult year, according to the study.  Eighty-one percent of providers are “very or extremely concerned” with the complexity of quality reporting programs, while three-quarters have a negative view of the relevance of these programs to specialty care, the costs of health IT infrastructure implementation, and high reporting thresholds that may be unattainable.
“For us and our patients, almost all of the ‘medical improvement initiatives’ dreamed up by the federal government over the last several years for the stated goals of improving patient care, bringing down healthcare costs, etc. have had the exact opposite effect. In my opinion, these initiatives are so far detached from reality that they are farcical,” said one participant.
“It is very discouraging to put so much time and resources into submitting for the program only to find out that we are getting a penalty,” said another. “It makes us really re-think 2015. The amount of administrative time and energy going into this program is not sustainable in the long term.”
Other studies have indicated that providers are already aware of the crucial role of clinical quality improvement in attracting lucrative patients, maintaining market share, and remaining a leader in the community.  With so many providers pushing towards quality improvement on their own, MGMA believes that simplifying the reporting structures could make a significant difference in this ongoing process, Gilberg added. “MGMA continues to advocate for a single-harmonized Medicare quality improvement initiative that standardizes reporting and supports physicians in their efforts to improve care for their patients,” he said.
Tagged Clinical AnalyticsHospital Quality


