AHRQ Grants to Aid Testing of Pediatric Clinical Quality Measures

October 05, 2016

By Nathan Boroyan
October 05, 2016 - The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) announced on Monday six recipients of a four-year, $13.4 million grant to support implementation and testing of new pediatric clinical quality measures within the Medicaid and CHIP programs.
The funding, secured within the MACRA legislation of 2015, is a part of the second phase of the Pediatric Quality Measures Program (PQMP), an effort to support performance monitoring and quality improvement for Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIP) beneficiaries.
Awardees of the four-year grant will work to test and implement new quality measures developed by the PQMP Centers of Excellence (COE) during the initial phase of the program.
“The PQMP Centers of Excellence provided us with valid measures of children’s health care quality,” said Dr. Andy Bindman, Director of the AHRQ. “This next step of research will help us test these measures in real-world settings. The ultimate goal is to improve children’s health through better health care, at lower costs, at both the Federal and state level.”
Dig Deeper
NQF: Adding Socioeconomic Risk to Population Health Measures is a Challenge
CMS Finalizes Annual List of Value-Based Care Quality Measures
Big Data Analytics, Governance Align CHI’s 100+ Hospitals
Quality measures are tools used by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) to evaluate healthcare delivery, patient outcomes and satisfaction.
CMS and AHRQ established the PQMP under Title IV of the CHIP Reauthorization Act in 2011, with the goal of making more evidence-based quality measures available to consumers of children’s healthcare services.
During the initial phase of the PQMP, seven COEs were tasked with developing new pediatric measures for improving children’s care quality in several areas, including:
Perinatal Care
Child clinical preventive services
Acute condition management
Chronic disease management
Patient-reported outcomes
Duration of enrollment and coverage
Availability of services
Medication reconciliation
In this next phase, grant recipients will conduct feasibility and usability assessments of the COE measures to evaluate performance in Medicaid and CHIP patient populations at state, health plan, and provider levels.
“Medicaid and CHIP give millions of children in the United States a health start,” said Vikki Wachino, Director of the Center for Medicaid and CHIP Services (CMCS). “Through efforts such as this Pediatric Quality Measures Program funding, we are able to advance states’ efforts to measure and report meaningful improvements in the quality of care for children.”
Tagged Care QualityClinical Quality MeasuresHealthcare Data Governance


