Can EHR-Based Prior Authorization Improve Medication Adherence?

December 02, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 02, 2014 - Medication adherence is a pervasive, expensive, multi-faceted problem in the healthcare industry, costing hundreds of billions of dollars a year in preventable spending.  While patients are ultimately responsible for ensuring that they refill their prescriptions and swallow their pills every day, providers are eager to help them do so as chronic disease management and good outcomes become ever more important to their own bottom line.
Between EHR reminders, patient portals, and more sophisticated connections with pharmacies, healthcare providers have a powerful suite of tools at their disposal to keep patients engaged in their care after a prescription is written.  But what happens when the medication can’t get to the patient in a timely manner due to red tape on the payer’s side?  Enter prior authorization, a useful but thorny aspect of the cost-cutting measures implemented by health plans.
“Prior authorization for prescriptions is something that happens about two to four percent of the time,” explained David Yakimischak, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Medication Network Services at Surescripts to HealthITAnalytics.  “That doesn’t sound like a lot, but when you take billions of prescriptions every year, there’s actually quite a bit of prior authorization work that has to go on.  Basically, the prescription is sent to the pharmacy, and when the pharmacy goes to get payment from the insurance company and run the insurance claim, that they find out if they need to get prior authorization.”
“And so it becomes a speed bump in the process.  The pharmacy can’t dispense the medication to the patient, so they have to get back in touch with the physician.  The physician has to contact the payer or pharmacy benefit manager (PBM).  And it’s handled through phone calls, paper, and faxes,” he continued.  “It takes several days, and we end up with a high abandonment rate where a number of patients just don’t wait for everything to get finished, and they never do get their medicines.”
Surescripts has long specialized in e-prescribing, and is expanding its capabilities as one of the most mature and widely used health information exchange infrastructures in the country to add additional interoperability and HIE services to its roster.  One of those services is targeting the cumbersome, paper-based prior authorization process.  In October, Surescripts and Epic Systems announced that they would be working together to integrate a simpler electronic prior authorization (ePA) process into Epic’s widely-used EHR products as a way to streamline the workflow for physicians and help reduce the number of prescriptions that get lost in ePA limbo.
READ MORE: Unfiltered EHR Data Overloads Physicians, Perpetuates Burnout
“Getting the medicine into the hands of patients quickly, efficiently, and cost effectively is such a huge, huge opportunity in healthcare, but prior authorization is viewed as one of the stumbling blocks or hindrances, if you like,” Yakimischak said.  “If you can get more through the system and you get more medicine into the hands of patients that are more compliant with their medication, they’re going to have fewer hospital admissions, fewer emergency room visits, less extensive impact to their health, to society, to their jobs, to their families.”
“We have statistics that show after 12 months, a patient’s adherence rate is less than 50 percent,” he added.  “So less than half of patients are actually adherent to their blood pressure medicine or their diabetes medicine or other medications.  Epic took an interest in this and agreed to do the technical work to make our prior authorization system available within their fleet of products. And their customers are very happy and very excited to hear about that.”
The Epic partnership is just the beginning of what will hopefully be many EHR vendors to jump on to the Surescripts bandwagon, the company predicts.  “We are pretty neutral in the industry and we want to make things open and available to everyone,” says Yakimischak.  “Some of the small vendors are actually pretty nimble, and already have pretty well all of their work done, so they’re ready to go.  As we introduce this and bring all the PBM’s online, they’re getting geared up to receive the data.”
To integrate ePA into the physician workflow, Surescripts and Epic are using methods that are familiar to any regular user of the internet.  “ePA is really just digitizing all the questions and answers similar to what you’ll do in any other type of online surveys,” he said.  “In the old days, people would mail out survey forms, right?   You’d have to sit down and fill them out and send them back.  Well, they had a very low rate of return.  Electronic surveys don’t eliminate the need for people to answer questions, but it sure does speed it up.  So you can go through a quick survey in a minute or two when with paper might take you 10 or 15 minutes.  The response rates are higher now with electronic survey, so it’s not unlike that.”
“One of the big differences with ePA is that some of the answers to the questions can come automatically from the EHR system,” Yakimischak continued.  “The EHR system knows my date of birth.  A provider doesn’t have to type that in each time.  We can prepopulate that data into the form.  Every time someone doesn’t have to retype something, you can reduce the possibilities for errors and you can speed up efficiency.  So there’s a big interest in the healthcare community for automating this prior authorization, and we think that over the next couple of years it’s really going to take off and become the predominate method.  Three to five years from now, we think paper will be in the minority.”
READ MORE: How Healthcare Big Data Analytics Helps Build Smart Societies
Paper-based workflows might fall by the wayside, but the process isn’t likely to be entirely automated any time soon.  Some EHR data, such as names, addresses, and birth dates may be easy for the majority of EHR systems to reproduce in a standard format, but provider who has ever tried to transfer data from one product to the next knows that less structured information doesn’t always translate appropriately.
“It does depend on the EHR and how they’ve coded their data,” Yakimischak acknowledges.  “I would say that just like anything else, it’s probably going to start off fairly basic when it comes to the prepopulated fields.   But as it becomes more standardized and common, that process can be improved over time.  I wouldn’t say that we will ever be at a point where it’s fully automated and where the user doesn’t have to enter any information.  We want the users to enter the information that only they can answer.  But if a computer can enter the information better, faster, easier, and more reliably, then why not get the computer to do the automation it can do?”
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR Data AnalyticsEHR Patient DataHealth Information Exchange


