ICD-10 Preparation is Costing 45.5 Hours, $3400 Per Provider

February 10, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 10, 2015 - ICD-10 preparation had always been a challenge for healthcare organizations, especially smaller facilities with fewer resources to spare for the complex transition.  But new data from the Professional Association of Health Care Office Management (PAHCOM) indicates that the organizational changes necessary to embrace the new code set may not be as time-intensive or quite as costly as they might once have seemed.
Despite warnings from the American Medical Association that ICD-10 costs would be prohibitive for small practices, organizations with fewer than six providers are spending an average of $8,167 per practice and 45.5 hours of educational and practice time per provider on ICD-10 preparation and implementation tasks.
The survey of 276 small practices, published in the Journal of AHIMA this week, provides an important benchmark for healthcare organizations as the industry counts down less than eight months until October 1, 2015.  Despite the number of activities that must be completed in that short period of time – health IT updates, clinical documentation improvement, coder training, external and end-to-end testing, and plenty of practice – the costs may not reach the lofty heights of $50,000 to $200,000 predicted in early 2014.
In the poll, single practitioners reported an average expense of $4,300, while a provider with 6 clinicians spent around $11,000 for all ICD-10 implementation-related costs.  The cost per provider decreased as the number of providers increased, with the overall average per-provider expense coming to $3,430.
Dig Deeper
Change Healthcare Plans Payer, Provider RCM Blockchain Tool
As ICD-10 Grace Period Ends, EHR Data Quality Reclaims Attention
48% of Businesses, Including Healthcare, Face Big Data Skills Gap
The study adds to the growing evidence that ICD-10 costs “are dramatically lower than originally reported in the widely publicized AMA-funded study,” PAHCOM says. “The financial barriers to ICD-10 are significantly less than originally projected.”
“The lower costs reported in this survey may be in part due to vendor response to the implementation of ICD-10,” the study notes. “ICD-10 educational materials are now readily available for a nominal cost. Practice specialty-specific superbills can be downloaded at no cost from the internet. Many software system vendors are providing ICD-10 system updates at no additional cost. The adoption of electronic health records by physician practices has further facilitated the transition to ICD-10.”
Providers are also spending a reasonable amount of time on transition activities when the scale of the project is considered, the survey found.  While the 45.5 hours of ICD-10 preparation time is an average that includes coders, physicians, administrative staff, and others, those hours have been spread out over months or even years as organizations continue to cope with disruptions and delays.
The delays may be over, however, as Congress backs 2015 as the final implementation date.  This week, Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-UT) said he sees “no reason for any delay past the October deadline” after a Government Accountability Office (GAO) report touted Medicare and Medicaid’s readiness to move forward with the new codes.  The report found that CMS has finished its technical preparations for ICD-10, though end-to-end testing with the healthcare industry is yet to be completed.  ICD-10 proponents have embraced the findings as evidence that the industry is finally ready to implement the new codes, although continued vocal opposition from the AMA, as well as concerns over providers who are still lagging behind recommended benchmarks, are likely to continue through go-live and beyond.
Healthcare providers are encouraged to view October 1, 2015 as the deadline for ICD-10 preparation, and should be engaging in clinical documentation improvement, systems testing, coder and physician education, and other organizational changes necessary to ensure a lack of disruption to the revenue cycle as the industry completes its transition.
  Tagged Health Information ManagementICD-10Revenue Cycle Management


