HCA: Obamacare Brings Accountable Care, Patient Responsibility

February 10, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
February 10, 2015 - The Hospital Corporation of America (HCA), the largest for-profit healthcare provider in the country, is coming out in favor of the Affordable Care Act’s attempt to expand insurance coverage to the majority of American patients.  Obamacare, currently under challenge from a Supreme Court case claiming that some consumers are receiving illegal subsidies for their health insurance, has been shown to significantly reduce emergency room use, increase patient engagement, and effectively share financial risk across the healthcare continuum, HCA argues in a legal brief.  These principles of accountable care would not be effective if the Supreme Court strikes down the subsidy provision of the “interdependent” framework of the ACA.
“Congress designed the ACA so that individuals who previously did not pay for care would take personal financial responsibility for that care,” the document says.  “HCA’s data reveals that patients on the federally-facilitated Exchanges, unlike uninsured patients, make significant contributions to the cost of their treatment.  The ACA embodied a carefully-constructed ‘shared responsibility’ framework under which healthcare providers would shoulder some of the costs but also share in some of the benefits.  HCA’s data show that hospitals have taken significant cuts in federal reimbursements under the ACA, but that these cuts are beginning to be offset by new revenues from expanded Exchange insurance.”
This give-and-take financial structure is good for patients, HCA says, because an increased patient responsibility forces consumers to make smarter decisions about their healthcare.  While 89.6% of uninsured patients visiting HCA facilities paid nothing for their care in 2014, contributing to $43 billion in annual uncompensated healthcare across the nation, an Exchange patient is likely to pay an average of $390 out-of-pocket for similar services.  Patients may be more likely to choose free, routine preventative care that keeps them well instead of risking a hefty medical bill for visiting the ER, and the HCA has data that proves the strategy’s effectiveness.
“In 2014, uninsured patients visited the ER approximately ten times for every inpatient admission,” the brief says.  “By contrast, individuals insured through the federally-facilitated Exchanges are visiting the EHR approximately three times for every inpatient admission.  Thus, HCA’s data indicate that uninsured patients are about 300% more likely than Exchange patients to rely on ER care.”
Dig Deeper
Large Patient-Centered Medical Homes Employ More Care Coordinators
Value Proposition Hard to Find for Care Coordination Tools
CMS Picks Care Coordination Hubs for Accountable Health Program
At the same time, non-ER outpatient services are seeing the opposite trend.  In the same year, uninsured patients consumed outpatient services 1.4 times for every inpatient admissions, while Exchange patients see an outpatient practitioner 2.8 times for every admission.  “HCA’s data reflect that the likelihood that an individual will access outpatient care nearly doubles when he or she has coverage through a federally-facilitated Exchange.”
Additional research has provided corroborating evidence for this data.  One study, published in Health Affairs in November of 2014, found that ER use among young adults has dropped by 2.1% in California, New York, and Florida.  A separate study from July stated that 60% of the 9.5 million patients who received insurance coverage during the first open enrollment period had accessed primary care services, with 40% of those patients required to wait less than a week to see a primary care provider.
HCA itself, meanwhile, has attributed a third of its $1 billion growth in 2014 to provisions of the Affordable Care Act.  Self-pay and charity admissions were down a whopping 14.8 percent, while managed care and Exchange admissions rose by 3.8 percent.  The ACA is expected to drive 4% of the corporation’s 2014 adjusted growth rate.
The Affordable Care Act is designed to encourage shared financial responsibility between patients and providers, HCA says, in the same way that risk sharing between providers and payers produces higher quality, less costly care. Gutting the federal subsidies that allow millions of new patients to engage with the healthcare system in an appropriate manner would cause the industry to backslide, especially since hospitals have already agreed to take on significant cuts to federal reimbursements as part of their ACA agreements.  Failing to allow the ACA to continue driving revenue to offset those cuts would spell financial disaster for many facilities.
HCA warns 90% of patients who are currently insured through an Exchange would likely stop contributing to their healthcare costs if the subsidy provision is eliminated.  “The costs of their care would again be paid by employers and insured families.  The reductions in ER usage would likely be reversed,” the brief says. Disrupting the “economic logic” of the ACA at this stage would be detrimental to the healthcare system as a whole, HCA concludes, and leave patients with no viable options for receiving properly accountable care.
Tagged Accountable CareCare CoordinationPopulation Health Management


