Physicians Seek Population Health, RCM Advice for Value-Based Care

May 23, 2018

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 23, 2018 - Physician groups looking to accelerate their transitions to value-based care are actively seeking out advice from consultants who can support the development of improved population health management and revenue cycle management initiatives, according to a new survey from Black Book.
More than two-thirds (68 percent) of physician groups with 10 or more practitioners are planning to recruit an external clinical and financial advisor by the middle of 2019 as they explore the most financially viable pathways for taking on more risk.
Physician groups linked to larger organizations may be moving more quickly, the survey said.  Twenty-one percent of academic medical center physician departments and clinics will have contracted with a value-based care consultancy by the end of 2018.
Dig Deeper
The 7 Step Plan to Success with Big Data Analytics in Healthcare
Population Health Nurses Require Changes in Education, Practices
Population Health, Value-Based Care Still Challenging for ACOs
These consultants are likely to have their work cut out for them, since 93 percent of surveyed physician organizations have no strategic value-based care transition plan in place due to a lack of internal experts.
Less than 7 percent have started to select the health IT tools they will need to manage populations and control spending.  A concerning 95 percent of CIOs at group practices and large clinics said that they simply do not have the IT staff to launch a comprehensive software overhaul.
"Many physician organizations are not succeeding linearly through the transition towards alternative payment models and do not have well-defined plans to hit certain date-sensitive financial thresholds, hence the rise in demand for consultant firms with value-based care expertise in physician organizations," said Black Book Managing Partner Doug Brown.
While the move from volume to value may be happening piecemeal, physician groups are well aware that clinical and financial success are inextricably linked.
Eighty-nine percent of the 900 participants in the survey said that they are looking for consultancies that offer both population health and revenue cycle management expertise.
The survey confirms other recent industry polls that cast some doubt on healthcare organizations’ abilities to successfully shoulder significant financial risk.
An April report by Numerof & Associates found that only 21 percent of respondents have achieved their value-based care goals as of early 2018.  Concerns about potential financial losses, gauging the timing correctly, and managing health IT implementations have constrained progress for many organizations.
Just a few months earlier, a survey from Deloitte and NEJM Catalyst stated that only 41 percent of participating organizations could assess the health needs of a given population – a key first step towards developing and deploying proactive interventions to manage chronic diseases and reduce risks.
Sixty-one percent said that integrating clinical and financial data would be a primary challenge over the next three years, while other organizations are struggling with obtaining data, leveraging unstructured data, and working with payers to extract actionable insights from big data assets.
Physician groups will need to focus on improving their data analytics capabilities and health IT infrastructure in order to succeed in a heavily data-driven population health environment, said Brown.
"Real end-to-end value-based care transformations require complex technology optimization, strategic assessment of patient mix and payers, analytics, decision support tools, staff training, outsourcing and new software implementations," he said.
"Consultative approaches that emphasize physician engagement, culture change, actionable data and analytics are producing some very prepared and motivated physician organizations as they move from volume to value."
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureChronic Disease ManagementHealthcare Revenue CyclePopulation Health ManagementValue Based Care


