URAC awards recognize care coordination, healthcare analytics

October 29, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 29, 2013 - Healthcare accreditation and measurement organization URAC has honored a number of providers, vendors, and individuals working towards better care coordination, increased analytics capabilities, and better outcomes with its 2013 Best Practices Awards and Health Care Stars! Awards.  Distributed at an awards gala earlier in October, the prizes reflect the achievements of organizations that advance the role of consumers who are active participants in their own care.
Robert Young Center and Community Health Care (RYC) received the Gold Award for Care Coordination and Clinical Integration for its efforts to address the needs of patients with severe mental illnesses by creating patient-centered health care homes for 385 persons.  RYC also added a mental health clinician to its community health center to better identify patients suffering from behavioral health disorders.
“It is so important to enhance communication between physicians and behavioral health professionals, and that’s what this care model does,” said RYC President Dr. David Deopere. “The first line of intervention is the referral for a mental health assessment, and by placing providers in the primary care setting, patients have easier access to the help they need that can improve both their physical and behavioral health.”
Other organizations honored in the category include CVS/Caremark for its medication adherence and retail pharmacy integration efforts, and HealthTeamWorks for piloting a multi-payer patient-centered medical home program.  FAIR Health received a Silver Award for quality measurement and data analytics for empowering consumers to understand their reimbursement and medical expenses, while Access MediQuip’s patient and device registry improved patient safety and quality of care.
Dig Deeper
Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
Collaboration, Big Data Help Phoenix Children’s Focus on Value-Based Care
The Platinum Awards were accepted by Active Health Management for its member engagement efforts, and Kaiser Permanente Northern California, for reducing hospital-acquired infections from Clostridium difficile.
The 2013 Health Care Stars! Awards were presented to Elvin Montanez, Pharm.D., Samuel Nussbaum, MD, and Leslie Wilchinsky, RN, CCM for their commitment to the welfare of health care consumers through saving and improving lives, preventing adverse health outcomes, and other positive changes.  Dr. Nussbaum, Executive VP and CMO of WellPoint, was recognized for his efforts to tie healthcare reimbursements to quality instead of quantity to increase value and reduce costs for patients in California.
Tagged Care CoordinationHealthcare Data AnalyticsQuality Of Care


