Will Half of Big Data Challenges Be Conquered by 2018?

November 24, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
Big data analytics may become routine in the next few years, but patient engagement, revenue cycle management, and population health will remain significant challenges.
November 24, 2014 - Healthcare will reduce at least half of its big data challenges to routine operations in the next five years, predicts IDC Health Insights in a new report, allowing them to focus on personalized healthcare, population health management, and containing unnecessary spending.  As widespread reforms bring a greater reliance on health IT infrastructure and patients demand more from their care, IDC believes that organizations will need to invest in better clinical analytics, more mobile technologies, and improved patient experience tools to meet the high bar set by pay-for-performance accountable care.
The IDC FutureScape for Health Insights report, presented in a webcast this week, provides ten predictions that cover the most pressing areas of health innovation.  “Common themes emerging from the FutureScape include the focus on consumer experience and engagement, the use of mobile and internet enabled devices, and of course, the 3rd Platform technologies,” said Scott Lundstrom, Group Vice President and General Manager of IDC Health Insights.  The predictions include the following:
• A quarter of hospitals will depend on improved, health IT-driven revenue cycle management to overcome critical operational inefficiencies by 2016.  This increased demand for better cost management, especially for patients with chronic diseases, will lead 70% of hospitals worldwide to make bigger investments in mHealth applications that engage the consumer and provide virtual care.
• As the consumer experience becomes more and more crucial for retaining market share and accruing revenue, 15% of hospitals will develop a comprehensive patient profile in the next two years that will allow for more seamless, personalized care delivery.
Dig Deeper
Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
Big Data Analytics, Population Health Top Executive Priority List
Unique Device Identifiers in Claims Could Aid Healthcare Analytics
• This will drive even more mobile investment – sixty-five percent of consumer transactions will be mobile by 2018, the report predicts – which will require healthcare organizations to focus intently on developing overarching strategies to govern their online presence and the patient-generated health data (PGHD) that will result.
• By the end of the decade, 80% of all healthcare data will be put into the cloud at some point during its lifecycle as data storage, analytics, and reporting goes virtual.  More than forty percent of all this data will be unprotected in 2020, but will need to be properly secured as information is increasingly exchanged across a variety of stakeholders.
• Providers will need to seek strategies to leverage big data for operational and clinical improvements as the industry moves quickly towards accountable care.  IDC believes that payers will turn to value-based reimbursement models for 35% of their payments within the next 36 months.
“These decision imperatives provide a road map for healthcare organizations to think about IT investments that will need to be made and the impact they will have on an organization, all of which can be used to support the planning and budgeting process,” Lundstrom said.
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health ManagementRevenue Cycle Management


