Feb. 25 HIMSS14 vendor news, announcements, & demonstrations

February 25, 2014

By Nicole Freeman
February 25, 2014 - Cloudera exhibits at HIMSS 2014 Conference: Cloudera, the leader in enterprise analytic data management powered by Apache Hadoop, today announced that it will be exhibiting at the HIMSS14 (Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society) annual conference and exhibition. Cloudera is located in the Clinical and Business Intelligence Knowledge Center in Hall A, Booth 883-9.
Predixion Software predictive analytics solutions now available for deployment on Windows Azure: Predixion Software, a developer of collaborative predictive analytics software solutions, today announced that its predictive analytics solutions for the healthcare industry are now available on the Windows Azure cloud platform from Microsoft Corp., enabling its customers to comply with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) standards on business associate agreements (BAAs). By creating a BAA for Windows Azure, healthcare organizations using Predixion’s predictive platform can now create both a public cloud as well as hybrid setup, in which data can be stored in both a public cloud and on-premises in a private cloud. The announcement is being made at the HIMSS14 Annual Conference & Exhibition where Predixion is demonstrating its predictive analytics software solutions for healthcare providers and payers at booth 4893.
Konica Minolta unveils document workflow solution for medical records at HIMSS 2014: Konica Minolta Business Solutions U.S.A., Inc. (Konica Minolta) today announces the unveiling of a new solution to help hospitals and clinics streamline and automate the handling of medical information at HIMSS 2014. Part of Konica Minolta’s EnvisionIT Healthcare solution portfolio, Dispatcher Phoenix Healthcare is a cost-effective and easy-to-use solution for the scanning, processing and secure sharing of medical records in compliance with Healthcare Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) standards and other regulatory restrictions.
Phytel showcases population health management platform at HIMSS14: Phytel, the leader in automated provider-led population health improvement, will demonstrate its Enterprise Population Health Management platform at the HIMSS14 Annual Conference to help care teams and ACOs better manage quality and proactively improve chronic and preventive care across their populations.  The conference, held at the Orange County Convention Center in Orlando from February 23 – 27, 2014, brings together over 37,000 healthcare IT professionals, clinicians, executives and leading HIT companies from around the world. During the conference, Phytel – ranked by KLAS at the head of the pack among “early leaders” in population health management – will showcase its platform designed to meet the future of value-based care in booth #4231.
Dig Deeper
CA Children’s Hospitals Win Davies Award for Analytics, Safety
Epic EHR, Big Data Tools Bring 2016 HIMSS Davies Award to Mercy
Health IT Helps CA Children’s Hospital Win HIMSS Davies Award
CareInSync and Samsung unveil next-generation mobile care coordination platform at HIMSS14: Strengthening its singular focus to improve the quality and efficiency of patient care across the continuum, CareInSync today announced the release of Carebook 3.0, the latest version of its successful evidence-based team care coordination platform. The announcement was made jointly with Samsung in their booth (#503) at the HIMSS14 Annual Conference & Exhibition.
Tagged HIMSSHIMSS14


