Coordinated Care Mentality Linked to Higher EHR Adoption Rates

December 08, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 08, 2015 - Healthcare organizations that employ advanced practice providers (APPs) like nurse practitioners and physician assistants were more likely to have adopted electronic health records and advanced care coordination technologies, according to a study published this month in the American Journal of Managed Care.
Providers with at least one APP on staff were between 9 and 12 percent more likely to have an EHR that included advanced functionalities such as documentation management, e-prescribing, and integration of lab reports and imaging data.
As team-based care strategies like the patient-centered medical home continue to prove their positive impact on coordination and outcomes, the use of NPs and PAs to engage patients in population health management strategies and expand access to care may be critical for mitigating the impact of a looming physician shortage.
Researchers from the Office of the National Coordinator analyzed data from SK&A Information Services’ 2013 Office-Based Provider Database to understand the relationship between APP employment and health IT adoption.  They found that nearly one fifth of ambulatory care providers are NPs and PAs, with 30 percent of practices overall employing at least one of these providers.
The practices with at least one APP on staff were significantly more likely than other practices to have adopted an EHR, the study found.  While three-quarters of APP practices had an EHR in place, just 58 percent of providers without mid-level providers used a health IT system to manage care.
READ MORE: Integrated Care Delivery May Bring Better Outcomes, Lower Costs
Primary care practices were twice as likely as multi-specialty practices to have APPs on the employment rolls, while rural practices were almost 50 percent more likely than urban ones to employ a nurse practitioner and 41 percent more likely to employ a PA.
Providers who recognized the importance of utilizing APPs for team-based care often employ more than one.  Organizations with a physician assistant on staff were 44 percent more likely to also employ a nurse practitioner, while providers with at least one NP were 36 percent more likely to also have a physician assistant available for patients.
“With an anticipated primary care physician shortage through 2020, implementation of team-based approaches could not only maintain, but also potentially increase access to, primary care services,” write Philip Wesley Barker, MS, and Dawn Marie Heisey-Grove, MPH.  “Advanced practice professionals are positioned to be key components of such care delivery teams.”
“In team-based approaches, APPs can provide care for the more routine cases, freeing up physicians to care for patients with more complex health problems,” they continue. “APP-provided care has been demonstrated to be comparable with care provided by physicians—sometimes with lower costs and improvements in patient trust and satisfaction.”
After controlling for variables such as practice size and ownership, the study found that there was a clear correlation between EHR adoption and the presence of APP staff.  Practices with at least one NP were 12 percent more likely to be using an EHR than their peers, while those with a PA were 15 percent more likely to have an EHR in place.
READ MORE: Healthcare Big Data Silos Prevent Delivery of Coordinated Care
And the technologies used were often more advanced than the systems in organizations relying on physicians and nurses alone.  Among practices that had adopted an EHR in 2013, 80 percent of systems could manage patient notes, 77 percent could engage in e-prescribing, and 76 percent could access patient laboratory reports and x-rays.  Organizations with either an NP or PA on staff were between 9 and 12 percent more likely to use an EHR that included all three of these functionalities.
The research presents an interesting contrast to data from an unrelated study published in the Annals of Family Medicine, which indicates that patient-centered medical homes may actually be lagging behind their peers when it comes to the adoption of health IT tools that can improve care coordination. 
The PCMH framework, which encourages the division of labor between physicians and APPs in order to improve access and maintain strong relationships, relies heavily on population health management and care coordination tools often associated with advanced EHR adoption.
The study found that less than half of PCMHs are capable of sending or receiving timely notifications of hospital discharges, while just two-thirds routinely track urgent referrals, and only 45 percent use health IT tools to provide summary of care documents to their patients.
While not all providers with NPs and PAs on staff are currently engaged in achieving or maintaining a patient-centered medical home certification, the two studies show the importance of health IT to providers with care coordination and team-based delivery in mind – and the gaps between adopting a theory and implementing the reality.
READ MORE: Penn State, Highmark Health to Spend $1B on Population Health
As the nation stares down a shortage of up to 90,000 physicians by the middle of the next decade, integrating advanced practice providers into a team-based primary care ecosystem will no doubt become a top priority for organizations focused on quality care.
“These results provide statistical associations between practice characteristics and the adoption and use of health IT. It is difficult with these statistical analyses, however, to determine causality,” the ONC researchers note. “The associations between EHR adoption and APP employment may be the result of underlying factors influencing both, such as the presence of innovative physicians who are both more likely to adopt EHRs and hire APPs.”
 “Future research should examine how practices with APPs are using health IT to promote better health and coordinate care, as APPs become a more integral part of office-based care coordination teams to provide coordinated, patient-centered care.”
Tagged Care CoordinationEHR AdoptionPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


