UChicago wins $1.55M for hepatitis C population health project

October 09, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 09, 2014 - The Extension for Community Healthcare Outcomes Chicago (ECHO-Chicago), a population health management program centered at the University of Chicago, has received $1.55 million in grant money from the CDC to further its work on hepatitis C education and prevention.  Eleven organizations, including community healthcare providers and public health agencies, will receive a total of $6.2 million over four years to expand the capacity of healthcare providers to treat the infection.
“We’re thrilled to have CDC’s support of this groundbreaking effort to reach Chicagoans infected with HCV and link them to appropriate care – particularly in this period of tremendous progress in well-tolerated, curative therapies,” said Daniel Johnson, MD, section chief of academic pediatrics and associate professor of pediatrics at UChicago Medicine. “The promise of this initiative lies in its dynamic, cross-sector collaboration, leveraging the strengths of each partner. ECHO-Chicago is pleased to lend its extensive community health network and valuable insight on health care capacity building.”
The Hepatitis C Community Alliance to Test and Treat (HepCCATT) collaboration will target high-risk patients in underserved communities for improved screenings, aiming to reach 18,500 people per year with 2,500 patients treated and cured of the disease.  Primary care providers will engage in video conferencing with leaders and peers to learn best practices for working with hepatitis C patients, while other members of the program will work to spread the word within their communities.
“There are no easy answers to halting the rise in morbidity and mortality from undiagnosed HCV,” said Johnson, “but any potential solution must address the unique needs of high-risk urban populations, bringing them into quality care and keeping them in quality care. We’re proud to be at the forefront of such a forward-looking community health initiative. Our hope is to develop a model that can be replicated in urban settings across the nation.”
Tagged Care CoordinationPatient CarePopulation Health Management


