Health IT Helps Hospitals Win Quality, Patient Safety Awards

August 12, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 12, 2015 - Intelligent and efficient use of clinical analytics and other health IT tools has figured highly in a series of care quality and patient safety awards doled out this summer by organizations including Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey and the American Hospital Association (AHA).  Five hospitals and health systems have been recognized with two separate awards in recent weeks, honoring their commitment to innovation, patient safety, and providing high quality patient care.
In late July, the AHA announced the winners of its Quest for Quality Prize, presented in association with McKesson.  Children’s Hospital Colorado, a 284 pediatric specialty center that provides the region with high-level trauma care, neonatal services, and specialty expertise, will receive $75,000 for its collaborative quality improvement programs. 
With a robust clinical analytics infrastructure and deep commitment to ongoing quality improvement from all stakeholders within the organization, Children’s Hospital Colorado has proven itself a leader in pediatric medicine, the AHA says.
Duke University Hospital in Durham, North Carolina was recognized as a finalist for the prize thanks to its performance improvement efforts, community outreach programs, and focus on providing same-day care access in its system of clinics. 
Dig Deeper
CDC Focuses on Patient Safety with Expanded Sepsis Education
Alarm Fatigue, Health IT Woes Top ECRI 2017 Patient Safety List
How Patient Safety Organizations Encourage Data Collection, Quality Care
Two additional facilities, Nationwide Children’s Hospital in Ohio and Schneck Medical Center in Indiana, received citations of merit for their work towards improving transitions of care, reducing adverse events and risks to patient safety, and demonstrating a collaborative approach to innovation.
“Every hospital can take a page from the book these hospitals are writing each and every day on how to provide quality care,” said Rich Umbdenstock, AHA president and CEO. “Through impressive engagement of patients, families, their boards and their whole staff, these hospitals are excelling in safe, patient-centered, effective, efficient, timely, and equitable care.” 
“I am truly inspired by the achievements of today’s award winners,” said John Hammergren, chairman and CEO of the McKesson Corporation. “These hospitals are examples of the future of health care and they prove we can continually improve patient care through innovation, collaboration and a commitment to excellence.”
In a separate announcement, Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey’s Horizon Hospital Recognition Program applauded CarePoint Health for its top performance on the 2014 Leapfrog Hospital Survey for patient safety.  CarePoint Health-Bayonne Medical and CarePoint Health-Hoboken University Medical Center both received “A” patient safety scores from the ranking organization, which uses national quality metrics to gauge performance in such areas as hospital-acquired infections and the use of evidence-based care.
"We are honored by the recognition of such a prestigious and influential organization as Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield for the high marks received by our CarePoint Hospitals in their quality and safety rankings from among the many hospitals in their vast insurance network," said Dennis Kelly, CarePoint Health Chief Executive Officer.
"We will continue the efforts that we have begun since we acquired our three hospitals on the brink of closure that focus on improving the quality of healthcare in measurable ways while expanding the access to the communities we are honored to serve. We look forward to maintaining our standing as Hudson County's premier health care provider."
"This recognition underscores CarePoint Health's commitment to high quality of care and patient safety," added Dr. Nizar Kifaieh, CarePoint Health Chief Medical and Clinical Integration Officer. "Acknowledgement from such an industry leader is yet another confirmation that our clinicians are among the best when it comes to excellence in patient care."
Tagged Hospital QualityPatient SafetyQuality Of Care


