AHIMA: Data integrity is key for analytics, ICD-10 data maps

November 19, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 19, 2013 - In the healthcare industry, interoperability doesn’t just happen with the magic flip of a switch.  In hospitals where the health IT infrastructure has been implemented in phases, stops, and starts over a decade or more, disparate systems with completely different ways of collecting and storing information need to be brought together.  In order to bridge the gap between systems or bring all pertinent data into one standard terminology for easier analytics, hospitals are increasingly investing in data mapping techniques, which can be immensely helpful, yet are fraught with the potential for critical inaccuracies.
An issue brief by the American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA) addresses the key requirements for successful data mapping, a topic that will only become more important as providers attempt to make use of historical ICD-9 data in the face of the ICD-10 transition in October of 2014.  While CMS has provided General Equivalency Mappings (GEMs) for ICD-9 and ICD-10, hospitals may have data stored in a variety of additional formats, including SNOMED, LOINC, and Rx NORM.
Just like the game of typing a phrase into a web-based language translator and then translating that result several times until you get something so convoluted as to be completely unrecognizable, providers need to be aware that data can lose its accuracy and original meaning when mapped again and again to different standards.  AHIMA suggests that HIM professionals in charge of such projects should understand the strengths and weaknesses of each different type of code set, including the level of detail each one encapsulates, so that maps are created and adjusted appropriately.
Ongoing maintenance is vital for ensuring that any updates to either end of the data stream are managed and incorporated into the translation procedures.  With the ICD-10 conversion less than a year away, now is an excellent time to review and overhaul any mapping procedures that are currently in use.  As part of the preparations for the switch, hospitals should be identifying every place that an ICD-9 code is currently used or transmitted, which will naturally lead to pinpointing where all classifications of codes are exchanged and translated.  An examination of data mapping procedures now may help mitigate some of the potential problems inherent in the ICD-10 switch.
Dig Deeper
83% of Life Science Execs Expect Healthcare Blockchain in 5 Years
Blockchain Offers to Solve Pain Points in Healthcare Data Management
Google DeepMind: Blockchain Can Ensure Health Data Integrity
But just as GEMs are no substitute for learning to code properly in ICD-10 to begin with, using data mapping is not effective unless health information is inputted correctly and thoroughly in the EHR at the point of care.  “Maps are created without context,” the brief warns.  “For example, the term ‘allergy to penicillin’ can be appropriately coded when the context of the health record reveals this is a history or status rather than an acute allergic reaction.  However, in mapping, this same contextual information is not available, which requires guidance for the user to confirm results.” Enlisting subject matter experts to assist in the creation of data maps, and to judge and tweak the results, can help create a firm foundation for the use of ICD-10 codes as a data analytics tool in the future.
“Awareness of these common areas of concern should bring additional scrutiny to the data mapping planning process,” the brief concludes. “Data integrity includes the ability to depend on finding the accurate data and being able to trust its reliability. Having the data stored once increases reliability and reduces the opportunity for conflicting results. For all these reasons, careful design of the map and validity of the setup is required.”
Tagged Health Information ManagementHealthcare Data AnalyticsHealthcare Data ManagementICD-10Interoperability


