LA Hospital Tackles EHR Adoption, Design from the Ground Up

October 05, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 05, 2015 - The thought has crossed the mind of every health information management professional, adoption specialist, and IT department worker – not to mention every physician and nurse – who has ever worked with an electronic health record.  What if I could bulldoze my hospital, erase all our workarounds, shortcuts, and illicit time-savers, and redesign everything from the foundation to the rafters?  What would we do differently if we had a completely clean slate?
Would I choose different vendors?  Would I structure our departments differently?  What could I achieve if I could develop a truly interoperable, robust, patient-centered health IT environment by hand-picking all my products, my staff members, and my EHR optimization features without having to stitch together old software systems and old habits?
It seems like more of a fantasy than a realistic proposition for most healthcare organizations.  After all, even new facilities created by existing systems have strict procedural rules to follow.  Brand new hospitals are rare in this era of consolidation, closures, and mergers, as healthcare organizations struggle to hold their heads above water in a turbulent economic environment.
But in South Los Angeles, a painful failure for an underserved community has left Chief Information and Innovation Officer Sajid Ahmed and Top Tier Consulting (T2C) Senior Partner Brad Armstrong with a unique and precious opportunity: the chance to design a $70 million health information technology program for Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Hospital, a small but powerful resource for more than 1.3 million residents packed into one of the most challenging regions of the country.
“This was a unique opportunity to build something from the ground up,” said Armstrong in an interview with HealthITAnalytics.com. “We started with a strategy that addressed what fundamentals we wanted to achieve. One of the early goals for our leadership was that we wanted to use technology to bring high-quality care to this underserved city population.  We wanted to lead with technology, and that includes telehealth and remote access.”
READ MORE: ONC Playbook Breaks Down Health IT, EHR Tasks and Buzzwords
“We also wanted to redesign the way hospitals look at themselves,” he continued.  “Rather than just treating incidents and single episodes, we aimed to create an environment of longitudinal, community-based care. That requires a lot of integration with the community and making sure there are smooth transitions and preventive care, which doesn’t happen a lot.”
MLK Jr. Community Hospital was envisioned as a replacement for MLK-Harbor Hospital, a 461-bed general acute care center that opened in 1972 and closed in 2007 when it lost its Joint Commission certification after a long struggle with patient safety and care quality.  While other hospitals in the area took on the task of caring for South LA’s hundreds of thousands of patients, convenient access to critical healthcare services was nearly impossible for residents in many socioeconomically challenged neighborhoods.
In 2010, LA County and the Regents of the University of California agreed to provide funding and support for a new South LA facility, which would be operated by a new and independent non-profit corporation.  Construction on the new organization began later that year, with the intention of opening its doors in 2015.
Leaders of the new hospital immediately sprang into action, eager not to waste what they knew was a golden opportunity.  With a very strict timeframe and budget mandated by the County, designing a health IT infrastructure that is streamlined, efficient, cost-effective, and intuitive, was no easy task.
“When you have an opportunity to design a hospital from scratch, you've got a pretty big whiteboard space to draw it all out and take advantage of economies of scale,” Ahmed said.  “The idea was to work with as few vendors as possible to get the most out of our relationships in regard to cost, but also to get uniformity in the system.”
READ MORE: Lack of Talent, Direction Afflict Healthcare Data Analytics Plans
“It was important for us to try not to patch together hundreds of different vendors or little components here and there. Ultimately, we ended up with between twenty and forty vendors all together for the full spectrum of our IT needs, which I think is a third of what we could have ended up with.”
After a very detailed selection process, the hospital followed in the County’s footsteps by choosing Cerner Corporation as its EHR partner.
“It just so happened that the County had previously picked the same vendor, which is helpful because we knew they would be one of our big partners when it comes to connecting and sharing data, and that would be facilitated by using the same vendor” Ahmed explains.  “Even though two different implementations of the same EHR can almost be like having two different products, we thought it would be a benefit to be working with the same underlying platform.”
Cerner’s reputation for interoperability and flexibility may have been one reason why MLK, Jr. decided to work with the company, but that doesn’t mean the process was completely smooth sailing.  “There's the good, bad, and the ugly of any EHR vendor,” Ahmed acknowledges.
“With Cerner, the good is that they've got innovative technology, and they're willing to push the envelope,” he continued. “The bad is that their implementation model, as such a large company, lets them fall into some bad habits. I think all of the major EHR vendors have this issue. They have a very proscriptive model for how you should convert from paper to electronic, or from one vendor to another. I think it’s a cultural problem.  Their employees often have such a high turnover rate that you don't know who and what you have or who and what they're saying.”
READ MORE: Epic Systems, Cerner Remain Leading Population Health Companies
“In our case, we were completely intolerant of this, and we would rotate people out if we weren’t getting what we needed. We were the squeaky wheel. Cerner, to its credit, ultimately came through and ultimately worked with us.  You have to create specific relations at the leadership and at the implementation levels to get things done,” he said.
It was important for Ahmed to ensure that tasks were being completed on time and in an acceptable fashion, because he and the hospital’s other leaders were accountable to more than just an executive board.
“It doesn’t seem like a small, 131-bed hospital in South Los Angeles would be very high profile, but when you look at the history of the old hospital that was closed down for all of the various reasons in 2007 and the impact it had…every member of Congress was notified when the old MLK-Harbor Hospital was closed,” he said.
“So you can imagine the pressure and excitement, and the eyes over our shoulder.  The LA Times was camped out on our campus. We said to all of our vendors, ‘If you fail with us, you will fail big, and you will be put in the news a lot more often than you would be for other contracts.’  Cerner listened to us, as we leveraged that as much as possible to get what we needed under budget and within the time frame that was required.”   
The pressure was about more than just looking good in the media.  The hospital has an important mission, and a shortage of resources in neighborhoods including Compton and Inglewood has left “huge vacuums to fill,” Ahmed said.  “There are only about 1,000 primary care providers and about 700 specialists serving our population of 1.3 million.”
Bulking up those numbers was important – and equally important was the ability to create a health IT infrastructure that could support the hospital’s plans for telehealth, remote monitoring, and population health management.  Crafting an organizational flowchart that took advantage of appropriate outsourcing was high on the list of priorities, Armstrong says.
“We didn’t have any staff to start with, so we were looking for IT vendors who had outsourcing options,” he said. “That’s not to say that we won’t take some of those functions in-house in the future, but given that we had so many things going on, the last thing we wanted to do was try to have to stand up all the technology and all the staffing at the same time. So, we really relied on a lot of vendors that had outsourcing and co-sourcing capabilities.”
“We retained a core group of folks who were able to manage the vendors. Having a strong vendor management function is very important – you need to be able to integrate all of vendors so that they cooperate, and you have to hold them accountable.”
Ahmed approached the staffing process with a hybrid mentality, keeping many leadership and management functions on campus to ensure the development of a strong, centralized command center. 
“I wanted to make sure that the managers and directors of our department – the project management office, the health information managers, the enterprise application, the data center and IT infrastructure side, and IT security compliance – were all in-house, and that we had accountability in those areas,” he said.
“We want to make sure that our values of caring and collaboration and accountability and respect and excellence are owned by us, and that we can set the standard there with our vendors. If we completely outsourced our vendors, we'd lose control, and we'd lose that cultural input and response.”
Crafting a culture of accountability doesn’t mean pointing fingers and piling blame on off-site workers, he stressed.  “It’s important to treat your outsourced staff the same way you treat your in-house people, so that everyone an embrace the same culture. There's no arms race.  No one is saying, ‘Hey, you're supposed to provide this service. How come your staff member is not providing this service?’ Because it’s not ‘you’ and ‘us.’  It’s just ‘us.’”
That mentality has brought success to the IT side of the equation, and has also allowed the hospital to attract top-quality staff to fill the clinical and administrative ranks, as well.  The opportunity to work in a new environment, well-stocked with the latest technology courtesy of LA County, sparked a great deal of interest among leaders in the field.
“It was easy to get some folks to jump in,” said Ahmed. “When we interviewed our OR director, she came in and said, ‘This is straight out of a catalogue.’  The County of Los Angeles and the people of Los Angeles really invested in this community allowing us to buy the best tools and equipment at bargain prices. We brought state-of-the-art technology to a community that hasn't had anything state-of-the-art for a very long time.”
“But in some sense, the technology is just the eye candy,” he continued. “I think what really attracted people was that we were a start-up. We didn't have any culture yet. We could define our own culture. We didn't have any workflow. We could beg, borrow, and steal the best workflows. We could create our own workflow. The leadership and clinical directors and managers had a real say in the beginning of the organization.”
The hospital’s leaders welcomed feedback from its new staff members as it built up the payroll, and found that there were plenty of EHR-savvy nurses and physicians who were intrigued by the possibilities of helping to design workflows and processes from scratch.
“We tried to find people with Cerner experience, which was both a good and a bad thing,” said Ahmed.  “Some of the doctors and nurses who had prior Cerner experience would say, ‘My level of productivity is at a comfortable level based on the system I used at this other hospital. Why isn't this system doing that?’"
“We really modified our system to create a care coordination process, and it was novel for a lot of these folks,” he added.  “I think we had some initial challenges just like all implementations do. We stumbled briefly on training, but we threw some more resources at it – I think we spent a total of six months with all hands on deck, all the training options, and elbow-support options.  That really helped adoption.”
Collaboration and an open mind helped to overcome some of these hurdles for the fledgling facility.  “Because the workflow was so new, everyone had to learn the workflow and the technology together, and it wasn’t as much of a challenge to break through bad habits or change workarounds,” stated Ahmed.
“And we didn’t have paper,” he pointed out.  “We weren’t a conversion project.  We didn't have a previously old system where people had to adopt to a new system. The only challenge we had was the baggage people brought of, ‘I'm used to my system at this hospital doing it this way.’ So we turned that challenge into an advantage by asking, ‘What did you do over there that was really cool?  Do you think that will help us provide better patient care here?’”
“We're instigating a culture of innovation and supporting that culture by getting feedback about best practices.  But we have to separate those best practices from people simply complaining that they’re using to working a certain way and they want to continue that.  We're open to improving it, but we can't completely throw out the baby with the bathwater just because you want it to work a certain way.”
The process taught the new hospital’s executives some important lessons about integrating people, process, and technology.   “Whatever it is you're building and whatever it is you're implementing, don't let the technology drive people. Let people drive the technology,” Ahmed said simply.
“Use this opportunity to drive some significant change management,” he said.  “Use it to revisit and refine all of the existing workflows so that they’re patient-centered, and help them prove that efficiency with your technology leaves more time for the nurse to spend with their patients.  That is always going to drive clinicians, because their focus is on patient care.  That’s a great thing.  They will always care about the patients above everything else.”
While a completely patient-centered point of view can sometimes bring tech developers in conflict with clinicians who express frustration about the complexity of health IT tools that take time and attention away from patient care, there is room for compromise and understanding.
“Before we opened, our COO basically said, ‘Sajid, we've got to open this hospital by this time at this budget because we have this mandate.  And if we can’t do that with an EHR, I’m willing to open this place on paper.’”
“I absolutely disagreed with her, because opening on paper and losing the chance for a clean start seemed to be worse than not opening at all,” Ahmed said.  “But I understood and respected what she was getting at, because her perspective is all about patient care and patient safety.  We had to sit back and learn how not to under-value that perspective, and how to introduce the technology as a tool. A tool is only as good as how you can use it.”
MLK Jr. Community Hospital opened its doors in July of 2015 without the need to resort to less-than-optimal workarounds.  The facility received its licensure from the California Department of Public Health and accreditation by the Joint Commission at the beginning of the month.  By the end of the month, the hospital’s Medical Director of Quality and Director of Surgical Outcomes and Quality had already been named to the National Medical Association’s 2015 list of Top Healthcare Professionals under 40. 
Ahmed credits the hospital’s early successes to collaboration, teamwork, and an enthusiastic drive to provide critical services for patients in dire need of convenient and high-quality healthcare regardless of their ability to pay for services. 
Advanced planning of its EHR implementation and health IT strategy, as well as a patient-centered perspective woven into the follow-through, have also been vital parts of the hospital’s strategic vision.
“There are two simple success factors to implementation of EHR – and frankly, to any implementation of technology that you can think of,” Ahmed said. “First of all, you have to have the clinical folks at the table designing and, to a degree, driving the tool.  The IT department can never be in the forefront. We can make suggestions and tell them what is or isn’t possible from a technological perspective, but ultimately we have to put the clinical perspective at the helm, otherwise we’re not going to make something useful.”
“The second important factor is training.  The folks that invested in training had greater success in adoption and appropriate use, and were more likely to view the technology as a tool that supports their patient care goal. I think that's something that we also learned in more granular detail, and it was a very valuable lesson that has really helped us succeed.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureEHR AdoptionEHR OptimizationPopulation Health Management


