How the Search for Smart Data Drives Healthcare IT Investment

August 05, 2016

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 05, 2016 - There’s no question that the healthcare industry has become extremely “data rich” over the past few years.  Thanks to the rapid pace of electronic health record adoption, the vast majority of healthcare organizations are now sitting on an enormous nest egg of big data, including petabytes of clinical, administrative, demographic, and even genomic data on thousands – or millions – of their patients.
But having data and knowing how to use it are two very different things.  Despite the keen interest in adopting a growing collection of big data analytics, predictive analytics, and risk stratification tools, few organizations have really cracked the secret of how to turn a wealth of fresh, unfiltered data into the spendable coin of actionable information.
Some fall into the trap of buying new products to solve each individual problem as it arises, not realizing that they are creating a patchwork of competing technologies, or developing ad hoc workarounds and an endless array of user interfaces that produce more headaches than they cure.
Others try to take a big-bang approach by ripping out all existing infrastructure and replacing it with a single end-to-end solution, but sometimes they end up biting off far more than they can chew.
And many seem to be taking a wait-and-see approach, focusing their efforts on the big regulatory projects and their hefty penalties while keeping a wary eye on the latest developments in the big data marketplace and possibly committing to a small-scale solution or two.  They don’t want to make any costly mistakes, but in the meantime, they may not be sufficiently addressing gaps in care or patient risks.
READ MORE: Data Overload May Impede Healthcare Internet of Things Growth
Meanwhile, the most successful organizations are taking a measured, incremental approach to smelting smart data from their raw materials.  With clear roadmaps to guide their investments in interoperable, standards-based technologies, and a committed analytics team to identify problem areas and brainstorm long-term solutions, these providers are already seeing measurable results from their efforts.
No matter what the underlying strategy, however, the majority of healthcare organizations are opening their wallets to technology vendors that promise answers to their big data questions.  Investment in health IT tools, especially in the analytics arena, are skyrocketing as organizations try to prepare for the coming storm of value-based care.
Recent research from Rock Health noted that in the first half of 2016 alone, digital health and data management vendors accrued a staggering $2 billion in funding.  The top category?  Big data analytics, with $309 million in investments, followed by Internet of Things technologies and population health management tools.
And the overall provider-sided healthcare analytics market?  It may be worth $18.7 billion by the time the next decade rolls around.
How is the search for smart data driving investments in healthcare technologies, and what are some of the major hotspots in the marketplace that are attracting interest from organizations trying to get an edge on the competition?  
READ MORE: 430M Internet of Things Devices Means a Healthcare Big Data Tsunami
Contemplating life after the EHR adoption tipping point
While the EHR Incentive Programs have not been universally beloved, they do represent a successful campaign to get electronic health record technology into the hands of providers.  The vast majority of inpatient and outpatient facilities now have access to at least the basics of electronic documentation: clinical notetaking, patient demographics, allergy and problem lists, and even a little bit of health information exchange.
These capabilities are vital for keeping up with the rapid pace of change across the industry, including a rise in patient expectations, the demand for quality over quantity, and the necessity to stem the rising tide of chronic disease.
Optimizing and fine-tuning an EHR system is no easy task, and the struggle to improve interoperability, EHR usability, and provider satisfaction is ongoing.  The rip-and-replace temptation is strong, if not always financially feasible, and a lack of available talent makes it difficult to successfully tweak a foundational system like an EHR without disrupting patient care.
Read: The Difference Between Big Data and Smart Data in Healthcare
READ MORE: AHIMA Offers Clinical Documentation Tips for Opioid Abuse
Kalorama says that the EHR replacement market is slated to grow by 7 percent annually as providers attempt to reconfigure their infrastructure to meet the challenges of the tail end of meaningful use and the uncertain future of MACRA.
Frost & Sullivan thinks the ambulatory EHR marketplace has an even brighter future, growing by 30 percent over the next five years as providers snap up tools to help them with clinical performance benchmarking, smoother data entry, and care coordination tasks.
With these new capabilities will come even more big data, and providers will have their hands full trying to understand how to identify useful data streams, analyze the results to create meaningful reports, and act upon the information presented to them.
"Realizing the full value of widespread EHR adoption will require focusing on these new challenges and it will be important to shift our focus from hospital adoption of EHRs to monitoring progress in these new areas," HIMSS said in its latest report recapping the EHR adoption landscape.
"This would not only include hospitals' interoperability but also examining health IT adoption and interoperability across additional settings including long-term care providers and behavioral health care providers, and beyond the care continuum, such as social services and public health."
From documentation to population health management
For those organizations that have managed to make peace with their EHRs, the challenge is less about collecting data and more about learning how to leverage their assets to tackle the pressing questions of patient care.
Chronic disease management and overall population health management feature prominently in upcoming regulatory frameworks, and they also form the core of many accountable care arrangements.  Reducing unnecessary costs through preventative care and health maintenance are primary goals for both private payers and public programs like Medicare and Medicaid, and health IT tools are they lynchpin for these efforts.
At the end of 2015, Tractica predicted that the population health management market would grow from $14 billion to $31.9 billion by 2020, driven largely by risk stratification technologies and predictive analytics services. 
These products use clinical data, such as HbA1c readings, blood pressure results, and current medications, to create risk scores that identify patients who may be likely to experience a crisis or a preventable hospital admission.
Risk scores have been used to aid diabetes management, reduce heart disease, heart attacks and strokes, slash costly 30-day readmissions, and flag patients who are likely to utilize the emergency department unnecessarily.
While many tools use traditional relational database technology to produce these scores and other population health insights, new big data innovations, like cognitive computing, blockchain, and semantic data lakes, are crafting smart data responses to questions that may never have been asked before.
On-the-fly semantic computing, driven by “thinking” supercomputers and sharply intelligent algorithms, can help providers dive into complex population health management queries that take into account a patient’s socioeconomic situation, community resources, past habits and experiences, or family history – if the data is curated appropriately and tagged with robust metadata that enables providers to extract long-term value from their assets.
Read: The Role of Healthcare Data Governance in Big Data Analytics
Investments in cognitive and semantic computing strategies are on the rise, with several mainstay technology vendors pouring billions into bulking up their cutting-edge analytics for healthcare applications.
Grand View Research estimates that the cognitive computing market for the healthcare industry will be worth more than $5 billion by 2022, driven by the cost-cutting demands of value-based reimbursement arrangements and the pressures of a growing geriatric population.
The “Analytics of Things” comes to healthcare
One step beyond provider-centric population health management is the murky realm of patient-generated health data, mHealth, and the Internet of Things. 
The challenge of keeping patients involved in their care, promoting healthy lifestyle choices on a regular basis, and helping patients stay adherent with medication regimens and treatment plans is perhaps the hardest part of the Triple Aim.
After all, patients don’t always consider healthcare to be a round-the-clock concern, and many providers are still trying to transition from once-a-year office visits for a cough or cold into true partners for continuous wellness.
Big data is helping with that transformation in a big way.  Basic patient portals and other patient engagement technologies are selling like hotcakes as providers seek new methods of keeping their consumers on the straight and narrow.  One recent report predicted a 23 percent compound annual growth rate (CAGR) for the worldwide patient engagement, which may be worth $34.9 billion by 2023.
And more advanced data connections, like patient-generated health data from wearable devices, implantable sensors, or home monitoring equipment, are slowly starting to find their way into EHR interfaces.
The “Analytics of Things” marketplace, which include predictive analytics, IoT gateway devices like smartphones and fitness trackers, remote monitoring tools, and sensor data analytics, is likely to become a $22.65 billion juggernaut by 2021, says Research and Markets. 
Expanding at a hefty 31.53 percent CAGR, healthcare is likely to find itself a major player in this multi-faceted market segment, as providers do everything they can to prevent patients from incurring preventable costs.
Will the thirst for smart data lead the industry full circle?
For providers, the explosive popularity of Internet of Things devices, the pressures of population health management, and the rapid pace of innovation in the field of patient monitoring is likely to bring back a familiar quandary: how can healthcare organizations funnel all this big data into a manageable steam of information that can inform clinical decisions without overwhelming users?
The answer may lie, once again, with the electronic health record, and an organization’s ability to optimize its reporting capabilities to prioritize actionable insights. 
Providers haven’t been doing such a great job of this so far, and the vendor community hasn’t come up with a widely-adopted solution to the smart data problem.
Even Acting CMS Administrator Andy Slavitt has decried the fact that the healthcare industry is extremely “data rich” but devastatingly “information poor,” unable to ask the right questions or get the right answers in a timely, meaningful way.
“Physicians are baffled by what feels like the ‘physician data paradox,’” Slavitt said. “They are overloaded on data entry and yet rampantly under-informed.”
Read: Preventing Big Data Pain Points During a Healthcare Encounter
At present, many of the industry’s smart data strategies are focusing on how to shove all of the necessary big data into a single interface – often the EHR that providers already use every day – in an effort to streamline reporting and create an intuitive command center accessible at the point of care.
EHR vendors have embraced this approach by offering comprehensive suites of products that integrate with each other and help providers avoid the piecemeal approach to creating a big data infrastructure.
New data standards like FHIR, and the growing interest in APIs as an interoperability solution are also helping third-parties promote their smart data algorithms as add-ons to the basic EHR. 
And health information exchange organizations are becoming regional analytics facilitators, offering broad population health management services, patient care alerts, and a neutral connection between disparate healthcare systems to aid in the coordination of care.
Regulatory agencies like CMS and the ONC have tapped the module approach to building the industry’s smart data competencies as the most promising for patient care.  Bolt-on tools and integrated interfaces may be able to harness organizations’ previous investments in certified EHR technology while creating an interoperable ecosystem of app-like satellites that deliver big data reports in a workable way.
The search for smart data may end in the same place it began: with the electronic health record that started off the healthcare industry’s journey into the digital era. 
Whether or not the billions of dollars in health IT investments will start to produce widespread returns in the near future remains to be seen, but vendors and providers both appear extremely committed to fulfilling the promises of smart data analytics for the delivery of quality care.
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementHealth IT InvestmentHealthcare Data GovernanceHealthcare Internet of ThingsPopulation Health Management


