Geisinger, Baylor Granted $3.5M for Patient Safety Learning Lab

July 20, 2017

By Jennifer Bresnick
July 20, 2017 - Geisinger Health System and the Baylor College of Medicine have received a three-year, $3.5 million grant from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation to establish a patient safety learning lab focused on reducing harm and improving clinical accuracy.
The Safer Dx Learning Lab, spearheaded by Dr. Hardeep Singh, will engage a multi-disciplinary team to leverage big data analytics and EHR data to measure patient safety, reduce diagnostic errors, and share best practices for quality improvement with industry stakeholders.
“I often get asked how health systems can reduce errors in diagnosis and use our emerging research findings to improve patient safety,” said Singh, Chief of the Health Policy, Quality and Informatics Program at the Houston VA Center for Innovations in Quality, Effectiveness and Safety and Associate Professor of Medicine at Baylor.
Dig Deeper
Patient Safety Improvements Could Cut Avoidable Deaths by 50%
How Patient Safety Organizations Encourage Data Collection, Quality Care
Patient Safety, Engagement Relies on Crafting a Culture of Change
“Developing the Safer Dx Learning Lab offers us a perfect opportunity to work with health system leaders and clinical teams to translate research into meaningful care improvements.”
Geisinger’s integrated electronic health record system will provide big data assets for the project.  The health system has provided consistent industry leadership in quality improvement and patient safety, and is eager to continue developing strategies to prevent errors and ensure accuracy.
“We have developed a Committee to Improve Clinical Diagnosis to target vulnerabilities in the diagnostic process and sustain a culture of diagnostic excellence,” said Dr. Dennis Torretti, Associate Chief Medical Officer at Geisinger Medical Center. “We are enthusiastic about this new partnership with Dr. Singh’s team and believe our combined efforts will yield additional insight and approaches to the problem of diagnostic error.
In addition to analyzing EHR data, researchers will interview clinicians and patients to identify opportunities for improvement in communication, clinical decision-making, and care delivery.  The team will also examine the costs associated with diagnostic errors and patient safety events, as well as the financial benefits of reducing incidences of preventable harm.
A Safer Dx Researcher-in-Residence will serve as a conduit between the two organizations to coordinate their efforts and facilitate communication.  Singh and his team hopes that the best practices developed during the project will inform industry-wide efforts to raise quality and improve the patient experience.
“Tools, strategies, innovations and lessons from this project would enable other health systems to learn from our experience and help scale up this program to other sites in the future,” said Singh.
Tagged Care QualityClinical AnalyticsHospital QualityPatient SafetyPopulation Health Management


