AAFP: Behavioral health should be an integral part of PCMH

April 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
April 03, 2014 - Integrating behavioral healthcare services into the overarching structure of the patient centered medical home (PCMH) should be a basic principle of the population health management model, say the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) and a coalition of other national medical groups.  With the release of a new document titled “Joint Principles: Integrating Behavioral Health Care into the PCMH Model,” the physician organizations wish to draw attention to the issue and provide a roadmap for providers who are interested in addressing both physical and mental health for their vulnerable patients.
“The incorporation of behavioral health care has not always been included as practices transform to accommodate to the PCMH ideals,” the report says. “Science has rendered untenable the artificial division of people into parts, particularly mental and physical parts. Given that over one-half of primary care patients have a mental or behavioral diagnosis or symptoms that are significantly disabling, given that every medical problem has a psychosocial dimension, given that most personal care plans require substantial health behavior change—a PCMH would be incomplete without behavioral health care fully incorporated into its fabric.”
By adding mental health care to the core list of services provided by the PCMH, providers can enhance care coordination among clinicians while ensuring that patients have access – and do access – the mental healthcare that they might need.  PCMH integration “enables warm handoffs at the moment the patient or family is ready and, thus reduces stigma, improves adherence and augments access to support groups, parenting programs and other medical neighborhood services,” the report says.
Financial barriers also often prevent patients from receiving consistent or long-term mental healthcare, due to benefit structures created by payers, and adding mental healthcare to the PCMH may reduce these access issues. Adding mental healthcare to the PCMH schema also ensures that any notes, prescriptions, or red flags documented by mental health professionals are included in the patient’s primary EHR notes.
Dig Deeper
NCQA Revamps Patient-Centered Medical Home to Ease Adoption
Top 5 Collaborative Tasks for Population Management, Public Health
What Are the Social Determinants of Population Health?
“It will also be important for all health care professionals involved in patient care to have a solid understanding of the role of the patient and family in articulating needs and developing a care plan,” says AAFP. “The behavioral health principles call for research to better define how best to achieve whole-person health care in the PCMH, with attention to patient, practice, training and financing issues.”
Tagged Patient Centered Medical HomePatient DataPopulation HealthPopulation Health Management


