mHealth, Predictive Analytics, Big Data to Take Off in 2015

December 01, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
December 01, 2014 - Predictive analytics, wearable devices, mHealth, and aggregation of big data through the “Internet of Things” are among the biggest technologies that will continue to revolutionize not only healthcare, but the rest of our data-driven society in 2015 and beyond, according to IEEE Computer Society’s end-of-the-year predictions. 
The rapid proliferation of data, which will stream through a number of interconnected, interoperable devices, will demand an increased focus on data standards to enable a rich portrait of health and wellness while predicting future developments with robust analytics.
“The time is right for wearable devices,” the list proclaims, as tech giants like Apple and Google vie for dominance in the healthcare field and consumers gain interest in using smartwatches, fitness trackers, and sleep monitors as ways to continually track personal metrics.  Providers are still working on appropriate ways to integrate these newly massive volumes of patient-generated health data (PGHD) into their EHR workflows, and many clinicians remain skeptical about the value of the information for relatively well patients.  But as attitudes change on both sides of the equation, wearable devices are set to play a more significant role in chronic disease management, fitness and preventative care, and patient engagement.
The rise of wearables, and the subsequent acceptance of big data as a routine part of individualized patient care, is part of a larger trend that will prompt development in several other areas of the healthcare data ecosystem: data standards, interoperability, and the integration of more devices that will encourage the progress of predictive analytics.  The interconnectedness of the lifecycle of health data, which no longer lives only in a single provider’s EHR, will demand a stronger focus on governance, integrity, and accountability from healthcare providers.
Dig Deeper
Predictive Analytics, AI for Lyme Disease Gets $800K NSF Grant
VA, DeepMind Partner for Machine Learning, Predictive Analytics
Predictive Analytics, Accountable Care Markets to See Rapid Growth
“Researchers have been working to address these issues for a number of years, however 2015 should see real progress in these areas,” said incoming IEEE Computer Society President Thomas Conte, an electrical and computer science professor at Georgia Tech.  “The exponential growth in devices connected to the Internet makes interoperability and standards critical.”
The majority of executives agree that embracing data standards and effectively harnessing predictive analytics and big data will be a key strategic advantage for healthcare organizations in the coming years, as reimbursements shift towards providing quality care.  Predictive analytics are already being used to help identify the risk of heart disease, the likelihood of self-harm, and the development of deadly hospital-acquired conditions.
These algorithms, programs, and risk scores will only become more finely-tuned and effective as organizations integrate more medical devices, more sources of data, and more sophisticated analytics with the growth of the “Internet of Things” – or as IEEE calls it, the “Internet of Anything.”
“The reality that up to 26 billion things will be connected on the Internet by 2020 is sinking in,” IEEE says. “The Internet of Things and Internet of Everything in 2015 will morph into the Internet of Anything (IoA). IoA envisions a common software ‘ecosystem’ capable of accommodating any and all sensor inputs, system states, operating conditions, and data contexts — an overarching ‘Internet Operating System.’”
“The way we deal with our health is undergoing a major transformation, not only because mobile Internet technology has made it possible to have continuous access to personal health information, but also because breaking the trend of ever-growing healthcare costs is increasingly necessary,” IEEE concludes. In order to maximize the impact of these new developments, healthcare organizations must work quickly to establish data governance policies that can ensure a solid foundation for the upcoming breadth and depth of big data which will become an increasingly vital part of providing routine care.
  Tagged Big DataBig Data AnalyticsGlobal mHealthPredictive Analytics


