EHRs hold the key to data analytics if you know where to look

March 19, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
March 19, 2014 - The EHR is both the best tool for clinical analytics and also an organization’s biggest challenge.  Implementing an EHR is difficult enough, but optimizing the system so it can function at its best has taken many providers years of very hard work – and that’s just to meet meaningful use requirements and figure out a reasonable workflow for clinicians.  The struggle to optimize an EHR for clinical analytics can be equally problematic, and may require yet another overhaul of how clinicians enter data and document their work.
“I think one of the things that’s really kind of a blessing and a curse of the EHR is you have a centralized repository of clinical care data, and so you can look at the care that’s being provided,” Michael Meucci, Director of Transformation and Improvement at Arcadia Healthcare Solutions, told HealthITAnalytics.  “But because there are so many challenges in adoption, that data doesn’t always accurately reflect that care quality.”
“Some physicians will say, ‘I capture vitals on every one of my encounters.’ And you’ll look at the report from the EHR, and you’ll say, ‘Well, no, you only capture it 50 percent of the time.’  But the physician will open the EHR, and they’ll show you where they’re capturing vitals, and sure enough, they are, but they’re capturing it in a free text field.  That’s hard to reflect in reporting and analytics.”
Free text input may be more comfortable for physicians used to composing narrative notes as they’re sitting with a patient, but unstructured data has long been the bane of informaticists and analytics professionals looking for standardized numbers to crunch.  While a number of tools are available to extract narrative data and turn it into something useful for analytics, providers who may not be at the point of implementing such tools can still maximize what they have in their EHR by consistently using structured input fields.
By collecting more data in a more standardized way, even providers with tightly stretched budgets and busy schedules can begin to turn a critical eye to their patients to begin population health management. “When we work with a client, we look at how they can build the strategies that stratify their populations,” Meucci said.  “It goes back to if they are really meaningfully using the EHR.  Are they really proficient in their use?  And for that matter, are they efficient in their EHR use?”
READ MORE: EHR Natural Language Processing Flags Social Determinant Search Terms
“That’s one of the things that we see a lot of organizations struggling with today,” he added.  “They’ll say, ‘my docs are capturing data.  We’re hitting our meaning use thresholds, but my patient volume has dropped.’ And I think the biggest challenge right now is that we have a shortage of primary care physicians in the country, and we really need to be able to see more patients, not only to remain financially viable, but to serve the community.  How do you balance being proficient, efficient, and building that right kind of collection of data?”
The answer isn’t always easy, especially since each provider faces its own unique mix of patients, office structure, technical proficiency, and room for organizational change.  But there are some relatively simple changes that grow out of data that is already available in every EHR if you know how to find it.
“There are some low-hanging fruits,” Meucci says.  “A lot of times if you ask a physician how many of their patients are diabetic, they can’t give you a real answer.  And if you dig deeper and ask how many of their patients are diabetic and haven’t been seen in the last 90-120 days, it’s an even more impossible question.”
“But if you shore up your data quality in the EHR, you can start to get an understanding of what those registries of your patients look like.  And from there, you really understand what the patient mix is.  If it’s available, we’ll pull in risk data as well so you can understand the risk stratification of your patient panel.  As you look at that, that’s when you can start to refine what you really need.”
“Using the EHR to dig into that is really helpful because you can say, ‘Okay, great, 75 percent of my population is primarily Spanish speaking.  You know, I really need to make sure that I have Spanish-translated materials in the office.’ Or maybe you can consider investing in hiring a medical assistant or a nurse whose first language is Spanish. Because we know from cultural studies that people are more comfortable talking about their health in their first language.  How do you appeal to them, make them comfortable in the care setting?”
READ MORE: Physician-Level Data May Not Reduce Opioid Prescription Rates
“Those are some of the questions that we look at as we start to work with organizations to define what their management strategy is,” Meucci added. “Who are your patients, and what do we know about them, and what can we discern about what you need in terms of transforming your practice around that patient population?”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsData CaptureEHR AnalyticsEHR UseHealth Data ManagementHealthcare AnalyticsPopulation Health Management


