Telehealth, education fight childhood obesity in rural CA

January 03, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 03, 2014 - A long, healthy life starts with the habits formed in childhood, but for many of the 18% of pediatric patients with obesity problems, those early habits can produce high risks for chronic diseases like hypertension, diabetes, depression, and orthopedic problems. Clinicians and researchers from the University of California Davis Health System are tackling the problem of childhood obesity in small communities with a telemedicine and family education program called HEALTH-COP.
Published in the American Journal of Medical Quality, research led by pediatrician Ulfat Shaikh, Director of Healthcare Quality at the UC Davis School of Medicine, shows that rural populations can benefit from weight management and nutrition programs conducted remotely through telehealth systems.
“Obesity prevention and management can be particularly challenging in rural areas,” said Shaikh. “Families don’t have as much access to walking paths, play facilities, and places to buy healthy food. There may be only one grocery in town. Sometimes families broach the issue, but other times they are in denial.”
To help provide education and support for patients and rural clinicians alike, UC Davis developed the Healthy Eating Active Living TeleHealth Community of Practice (HEALTH-COP), a virtual learning and quality improvement network deployed to seven rural California clinics.  Staff members at the facilities were taught to provide nutrition and exercise counseling, spot risk factors, and redesign workflows to better address obesity issues.
Dig Deeper
Top 5 Collaborative Tasks for Population Management, Public Health
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Eye Docs Looking for Big Data, Population Health Analytics Research
“We provided instruction on motivational interviewing to help change lifestyle behavior. Teams were taught to assess where the family is and help them with their decision making,” Shaikh said.  The clinics were scored on tasks such as documenting body mass index (BMI) for patients, and the research team found that after using educational materials and remote conferencing, the providers raised their scores from a mean of 3.5 to 4.6 on a scare of zero to five.  The study also examined patient perceptions of the weight control care they received.  After three months of counseling through the program, pediatric patients had improved their diets and raised their physical activity levels.
Providers also benefited significantly from using HEALTH-COP to connect with peers for collaborating on strategies and providing mutual support. “As an urban pediatrician, if I can’t figure out a problem, all I have to do is find a colleague in the building and get their impressions,” Shaikh said. “By setting up this network, we made it easier for rural clinicians to do the same. Regardless of where they were in California, they all face similar problems. Now they can share solutions.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementMedical ResearchPopulation HealthPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


