AMA, AHA to Prioritize Hypertension, Chronic Disease Management

November 13, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
November 13, 2015 - As the “silver tsunami” of aging patients continues to make comprehensive chronic disease management difficult for healthcare providers, the American Medical Association and American Heart Association are targeting one of the conditions that may have broad implications for a patient’s health: uncontrolled hypertension.
A new nationwide initiative called “Target: BP” will provide resources, education, and support to healthcare organizations seeking to combat this significant population health management challenge, which afflicts approximately 80 million American adults.
“For several years, the AMA has been keenly focused on the millions of Americans who have uncontrolled hypertension,” said AMA President Steven J. Stack, MD. “This new collaboration will significantly build on the work we’ve already begun to improve cardiovascular health.”
“As an emergency physician, I’ve seen first-hand the devastating impact of heart disease and I’m personally proud to be a part of a national effort that will not only save lives but help people live healthier and happier lives,” he added.
Dig Deeper
VA Releases Data Visualization of Opioid Prescribing Rates
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
Big Data Analytics, Population Health Top Executive Priority List
The American Health Association recommends a blood pressure goal of lower than 140/19 mm Hg, although the AHA is currently undertaking big data analytics research to refine their guidance if necessary. 
Using data from the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT), researchers have found that reducing blood pressure to 120 mm Hg significantly reduces the combined rate of experiencing a heart attack, acute coronary syndrome, or heart failure.  A lower blood pressure also cuts the likelihood of having a stroke and lowers mortality rates.
“The SPRINT results underscore our long-standing position to detect and aggressively treat people with high blood pressure,” said Mark Creager, MD, President of the AHA and director of the Heart and Vascular Center at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, New Hampshire.
“Currently, only about half of Americans with high blood pressure are achieving our recommended blood pressure reading of below 140/90 mm Hg,” he continued. “With Target: BP, we’ll equip healthcare providers and their patients with information and tools, to help keep blood pressure under control. By controlling blood pressure, we can potentially prevent progression to other serious threats to heart and brain health.”
The AHA and AMA will work directly with hospitals and provider organizations to raise awareness about the widespread impact of uncontrolled hypertension, and will deliver resources and tools to help achieving blood pressure goals for their patients.  The initiative will feature the AHA/ACC/CDC Hypertension Treatment Algorithm, and will also recognize the achievements of high-performing providers.
The program is intended to complement existing efforts from the Million Hearts initiative, which has made significant strides towards its goal of preventing one million heart attacks and strokes by 2017.  The successful project has stressed the importance of chronic disease management in the primary care setting, and also encourages healthcare organizations to leverage EHR technology, population health management tools, and big data analytics to target interventions and identify at-patients.
“Centers for Disease Control and Prevention research reveals high blood pressure was a primary or contributing cause of death for more than 360,000 Americans in 2013 – that’s nearly 1,000 deaths each day,” said Dr. Janet Wright, Executive Director of Million Hearts. “Getting blood pressures into the safe zone, through initiatives like Target: BP, means that millions more people will lead longer, healthier lives.”
More than 50 healthcare organizations serving a combined total of 18 million patients have already committed to participate in the Target: BP initiative, the AHA and AMA said.
“We recognize the threat of uncontrolled blood pressure and certainly need to do a better job in helping our patients achieve blood pressure targets with lifestyle modifications as well as ideal medical therapy,” said Dr. Daniel Simon, Division Chief of Cardiovascular Medicine at UH Case Medical Center and President of the Harrington Heart and Vascular Institute at University Hospitals, an early adopter of the Target: BP program.
“Bringing evidence-based treatment approaches to our practices through Target: BP is a simple, effective way to help us renew our focus on blood pressure and bring more patients to their ideal goal.”
Tagged Chronic Disease ManagementClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


