Health Catalyst scoops up $41M for analytics, data warehousing

January 29, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
January 29, 2014 - Healthcare’s thirst for data analytics is driving some very large investments for some very lucky companies, including Health Catalyst.  The data warehousing and analytics firm just locked down $41 million in venture capital funding to help fuel its rapid growth.  Big names like Kaiser Permanente and Partners HealthCare have already bet on CEO Dan Burton’s success, and with nearly $100 million in the bank, it seems like a sound investment.
The company is positioning itself to take on warehousing and analytics giants like IBM and Oracle, whose long experience in data management has helped them naturally transition into healthcare.  Other behemoths like GE and Philips have also recently announced their intention to enter the field with informatics expertise and staff management technologies attempting to boost efficiency and demolish financial waste.  Venture capital funding is becoming a vital lifeline for startups in the health IT space, and investment reached a staggering $2.2 billion in 2013.
“We are thrilled that our existing investors chose to continue their strategic relationships with us, leading the way to major innovations for US healthcare,” said CEO Dan Burton. “As more healthcare organizations are coming to understand, data warehousing and analytics are foundational to their success under new payment and risk models.  This additional capital will enable Health Catalyst to develop the applications necessary to offer every health system in the US a roadmap to systematically reduce waste and improve care delivery, across every major clinical and workflow area.”
The company plans to pour $50 million into the development of new products over the next two years.  Burton hopes to create 200 applications to help improve efficiencies in hospitals, including one to flag medical errors.  Its late-binding data warehousing system has already seen success in places like Texas Children’s Hospital, where its analytics were able to cut the number of unnecessary x-ray orders in half.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureData CaptureData StorageHealthcare AnalyticsHealthcare Business IntelligenceHealthcare Data ManagementHealthcare Data Strategy


