$1.7M Population Health Management Grant Aids Collaboration

September 29, 2016

By Nathan Boroyan
September 29, 2016 - A $1.7 million grant from The Kresge Foundation will foster collaboration and population health management strategies aimed at improving outcomes in low-income communities.
The "Healthy Outcomes" initiative, a product of the Nonprofit Finance Fund (NFF), will foster new relationships between providers and community-based public health organizations to achieve the Triple Aim..
"The growing shift from fee-for-service to outcomes-based payment models, accelerated by the Affordable Care Act, presents urgent and compelling opportunities for all stakeholders to re-orient together around building healthier communities," NFF CEO Antony Bugg-Levine said in a press release.
"Bridging the on-the-ground knowledge of community-based providers with the population expertise of healthcare organizations will be critical to realizing the promise of healthcare reform."
Dig Deeper
30-Day Patient Mortality Rates Drop During Hospital Inspections
FDA Antibiotic Stewardship Tool Offers Centralized Data Resource
State-Led Programs Help Meet Population Health Management Goals
Public health and community service organizations help connect patients to basic needs, including housing, food security, and transportation. As part of "Healthy Outcomes," NFF will provide advice, financial support, tools, and other assistance to human services providers that will allow them to work with healthcare organizations.
"NFF's leadership will assist human services organizations with proven track records in addressing the social determinants of health to become key partners for healthcare organizations," said David Fukuzawa, managing director of The Kresge Foundation's Health and Human Services Programs. "Seamless coordination between human services and healthcare organizations could greatly increase both well-being and opportunity for people with low-income."
By helping human service providers transition into organizations with the capabilities and capacity to partner with other healthcare organizations, NFF's initiative could eliminate barriers to population health management that impact low-income patients' quality of care.
Dig Deeper:
Health IT Improves Triple Aim in HIMSS Leadership Survey
Is the Triple Aim of Healthcare Achievable through EHRs?
Tagged Care QualityPatient OutcomesPopulation Health Management


