HHS, USDA Invest $1B in Rural Health, Care Coordination

May 06, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
May 06, 2015 - The Department of Health and Human Services has helped to lead the way towards better care coordination for patients and providers in rural areas by generating $1 billion in rural healthcare funding.  In conjunction with the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), the federal government has poured hundreds of millions of dollars into rural communities to aid with health IT improvement projects like EHR adoption, health information exchange, telehealth services, and other critical care coordination tools.
“In late 2011, the President announced a White House Rural Council initiative lead by HHS and the USDA to invest in rural health and link rural doctors and hospitals to financing for health IT,” write National Coordinator Karen DeSalvo, MD, MPH, MSc and Brandon McBride, Administrator of Rural Utilities Service at the USDA in a new blog post on Health IT Buzz. “The initiative was designed to address the need for financing to support the adoption of health IT systems in rural communities.”
Critical access hospitals (CAHs) and primary care providers who operate in remote or sparsely populated regions of the country have faced significant financial challenges during the transition to a data-driven healthcare delivery system, DeSalvo and McBride say.  From a lack of reliable broadband internet access to budgets that simply do not allow for full EHR adoption and meaningful use attestation, rural care providers have had to be innovative and committed to ensuring they are providing the best possible treatment and care coordination with specialists or other facilities that may be hundreds of miles away.
Starting in 2012, projects led by HHS and the USDA have raised approximately $1 billion to help solve the problems faced by the most vulnerable healthcare organizations and their patients.  “These investments, funded by USDA, included grants and loans to help rural clinics and hospitals transition from paper to electronic health records (EHRs), encourage exchange of health information with health care providers and patients, and offer telehealth services,” the blog post says.
Dig Deeper
Synchronized Pick-Up Boosts Medication Adherence Up to 13%
Provider Experience, Chronic Disease Impact PCMH Referral Rates
CMS: Patient-Centered Care Strategies Can Combat Opioid Abuse
“Since it launched in 2012, the initiative has expanded access to financing for rural health care needs through cross-government collaboration and partnerships with non-Government organizations—including bringing together diverse teams to achieve common goals and using existing programs in innovative ways.”
Grant projects such as the Distance Learning and Telemedicine (DLT) program have raised millions to improve connectivity and address specific health needs for patients who may not have access to services in their local area.  Some of the $8.6 million in USDA grants went to specialty programs for patients with bleeding disorders and Hepatitis C in Oklahoma and Michigan, while others focused on at-risk children and seniors, bolstered telehealth infrastructure for general care in California, and provided telemedicine capabilities in community healthcare resources and clinics on reservation lands owned by the Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe.
“Other key partners joined the effort to offer financing assistance. For example, the Delta Regional Authority (DRA) made available a new Rural Health IT Loan Fund to help health care providers across eight states,” DeSalvo and McBride continue. “Through this initiative, DRA offered interest free loans to small practices, particularly physicians and dentists in underserved areas to assist with adoption and meaningful use of EHRs.”
In addition to hundreds of millions contributed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to speed the development of reliable broadband internet networks in rural regions, local organizations such as telecommunications companies and municipal utilities have also worked to provide health IT infrastructure funding to clinics and hospitals through ten-year, zero interest loans provided by the Rural Economic Development Loan and Grant Program (REDLG). 
“Importantly, we began convening state-specific, in-person workshops to bring Government and non-Government partners to the table with health care providers to find creative solutions for challenges that rural and poor communities face accessing financing for rural health care and rural health IT,” add DeSalvo and McBride.  By the end of 2014, these workshops had taken place in thirteen states with significant rural populations, bringing the provider community together to discuss specific regional challenges to care coordination, access to care, and other pressing concerns.
Tagged Care CoordinationPopulation Health ManagementTelehealth


