Are hospital readmission fines a “distraction” or motivation?

October 29, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 29, 2013 - The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) isn’t always popular with providers, especially when instituting penalties and payment cuts for quality-based measurements of patient care.  Despite leveraging advanced clinical analytics, robust clinical decision support, and care coordinators to guide patients through the discharge process, hospitals have still been on the hook for hundreds of millions of dollars in quality-based penalties due to the readmission of Medicare patients within 30 days of leaving.  Are these penalties a justifiable motivation for providers to close care gaps, or nothing more than a distraction based on faulty intelligence and factors beyond the hospital’s control?
Since the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP) started in 2012, hospitals have paid out more than $500 million in fines for patients who have returned to the hospital within 30 days.  With nearly 20% of Medicare patients falling under this umbrella, and about two-thirds of hospitals nationwide sharing the responsibility, the problem is not localized or easily solvable.
Understandably, providers have long argued against the effectiveness of penalties for initiatives like the EHR Incentive Programs and accountable care, but they seem to be working.  Hospitals paid out $53 million less in the second year of HRRP than they did in the first, and an emphasis on using EHR data analytics, predictive risk scores, and more comprehensive population management techniques seem to be paying off.  But that doesn’t mean everyone is happy about it.
“Outcomes for chronic illnesses can vary widely, resulting in potentially unfairly penalizing hospitals and physicians for readmissions that are not under their control,” argued the American College of Surgeons in a June letter to CMS.   Since low-income and limited education populations often suffer from higher rates of chronic diseases, sharply increasing fines for chronic illness readmissions “could result in hospitals that care for high-risk populations being inadvertently targeted or incentivized to limit access to care to such high-risk patients.”
Dig Deeper
Nutrition Risk Assessment Saves $4.8M, Cuts Hospital Readmissions
New Collaboration to Support Diabetes Prevention, Management
What is the New Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Program?
“My own view is that this is a gigantic distraction, that it’s a flawed metric,” said Dr. Marvin A. Konstam of Tufts University at a recent meeting of the Heart Failure Society of America. “It’s not a quality measure, it’s arbitrary in a number of different ways, [and] it has unintended consequences.”  However, he added, it could be viewed as an “intermediate step” towards putting the focus on congestive heart failure, for example, as a chronic problem in need of better strategies for handling care coordination and patient outreach.
Hospitals like Indiana Regional Medical Center (IRMC) are doing just that.  The new Primary Care Resource Center at IRMC, funded by a CMS Health Care Innovations Award, will serve as an extension center for patients needing help with transitions of care, targeting high-risk COPD, heart failure, and heart attack patients.
“Our main goal is to improve quality of life,” said IRMC spokesperson Donna Hoare Scanlon. “We definitely want to decrease readmissions, but to do that you need to improve quality of life.  Obviously it’s in our best interest to make sure we’re doing everything we can to keep our readmission rates down, as is every hospital across the nation.”
“Part of what the grant requires us to do as the primary care nurses and pharmacists is to provide 30 minutes of education while they’re a patient here,” Scanlon continued.  “A big part of it, too, is communication between the hospital and the primary care doctors.  Sometimes that’s where the gap is, and there’s also a gap many times when the patient gets home and they’re not seeing their doctors within seven days. That will also be a focus we have, to get them in to see their doctors within that one-week period post-discharge.”
Even Dr. Konstam admits that “we’re stuck with this metric” for now, and that means providers will need to continue to innovate and incorporate data analytics into their strategies for tackling the problem.  With government grants enabling researchers to dive into the thorny issue of predictive risk identification and a growing awareness that hospitals must do more than just treat the patients that walk through the doors, the HRRP penalties may just be the financial kick necessary to spur providers into action, however distasteful they may seem.
Tagged Accountable CareHospital ReadmissionsPatient CarePopulation Health ManagementQuality Of Care


