Hospitals using analytics to tackle infections, hand hygiene

October 23, 2013

By Jennifer Bresnick
October 23, 2013 - Hospital-acquired infections (HAI) are one of the leading causes of extended inpatient stays and patient deaths.  Hand hygiene may seem like a simple and manageable way to slash the number of HAIs, but it’s often overlooked, but despite believing that higher-grade hygiene can have a significant effect, hospitals don’t always take advantage of the tools at their disposal to track and prompt clinical staff.  Data analytics using electronic hand monitors and social network modeling to track bacterial spread are stepping in to help providers keep clean and keep their patients healthy.
Approximately one in every 20 patients will acquire an infection while in the hospital, according the CDC, costing tens of billions of dollars for providers across the care continuum and killing 100,000 patients a year.  About 20% of these infections are probably preventable, with a potential savings of anywhere between $6.8 billion and $31.5 billion.
A poll by hygiene system vendor DebMed found that while 90% of patient safety staff believe in the importance of hand hygiene for reducing infections, only 30% of hospitals have implemented World Health Organization (WHO) standards for hand hygiene, and only 1.5% use electronic data to track washing and disinfection.  Three-quarters of respondents believe that electronic monitoring is more effective than direct observation, which can artificially inflate numbers when staff members know they’re being watching.
With hospitals on the hook for more than $200,000 in penalties for violations of infection control starting in 2015, health systems are starting to use analytics to better control infection rates.  A new study by researchers at the University of Maryland and American University have developed a framework for hospitals based on social networking principles to help identify possible contagions and limit staff contact with particularly vulnerable patients.  By simulating the interactions of staff with patients, including the acknowledgement that clinical staff often swap duties or cover for one another, the study was able to identify patterns in transmission that could be better controlled.
Dig Deeper
$240M IBM, MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab Has Healthcare Focus
Clinical Analytics Studies, Partnerships Target Personalized Care
Cancer Mortality Rates See 20% Drop, but Disparities Remain
“The basic reality is that healthcare workers frequently cover for one another due to meetings, breaks and sick leave.  The health care industry’s electronic records movement could soon generate data that captures the structure of patient-healthcare worker interaction in addition to multiple competing, related factors that can affect multi-drug resistant organism transmission,” said Sean Barnes, University of Maryland Smith School assistant professor of operations management.
In addition to limiting unnecessary contact, the WHO suggests five instances of hand washing when interacting with a patient: before touching the patient, before aseptic procedures, after potential exposure to bodily fluids, after touching the patient, and after touching the patients’ surroundings, but most clinical staff only wash their hands before entering the room and after leaving.  Only 24% of hospitals believe their hand hygiene compliance rates are at 81% or above.  Fifteen percent of participants are planning to start using electronic data to better monitor and improve their hygiene rates.
“It is encouraging to see hospitals starting to realize the advantages of moving from the  antiquated method of tracking hand hygiene compliance through direct observation to a more accurate, reliable and cost-effective electronic solution that will aid in improving hand hygiene compliance, reduce infections and save patient lives,” says Heather McLarney, vice president of marketing at DebMed. “What is needed now is for hospitals to take advantage of the latest technologies such as electronic hand hygiene monitoring systems that allow them to make a dramatic impact on the quality and safety of patient care.”
Tagged Applied AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsMedical ResearchPatient CareQuality Of Care


