AHRQ Grant Will Bring Informatics to EHR Optimization

November 18, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
A study on EHR optimization hopes to help providers leverage health IT without succumbing to productivity losses or adversely affecting the quality of care.
November 18, 2014 - A $2.5 million grant from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) will allow researchers at the University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC) to combine informatics with research into how EHRs can be optimized to help foster efficiency and patient safety.  John Windle, MD, professor and chief of cardiology at UNMC and Ann Fruhling, PhD, director of the Interdisciplinary Informatics School at the University of Nebraska at Omaha, will work on combining real-life experience with EHR systems and expertise in computer-human interactions to identify best practices for EHR development and use.
“EHRs were originally designed, developed and optimized as a financial system and a way to document payment and services rendered,” said Windle. “But the EHR really has never been designed or developed for the people using it to take care of patients. We’ve been adversely affected by it because of how we take care of patients. It slowed us down. It was a barrier to communication.”
The study will enlist cardiologists at several medical centers across the country, including Duke Medical Center in North Carolina and Parkview Health in Indiana, to measure how the physicians interact with their EHRs.  By developing real-life clinical situations and using researchers to simulate actual patient encounters, the team hopes to highlight best practices for EHR utilization as a way to curb the ongoing dislike and frustration with health IT systems that holds physicians back from using the technology to its best advantage.
EHRs have been labeled a source of stress for physicians, and yet the general dissatisfaction may actually be driving improvements in clinical analytics, health information exchange, and other supplementary infrastructure that can turn basic documentation systems into truly useful, integrated ecosystems that promote population health management and preventative care.
Dig Deeper
AMA Launches Integrated Healthcare Big Data Analytics Platform
Regenstreif EHR Developers Win AMIA Healthcare Informatics Award
EHR Tech Support with Clinical Focus Enhances Patient Care Quality
“What we are hearing increasingly from healthcare leaders is dissatisfaction with their existing EHR systems, often citing cost and difficulty of use,” said Premier, Inc. COO Michael J. Alkire, commenting on a survey that found 30% of healthcare executives are so dissatisfied with their EHRs that they are turning to supplementary technology. “Providers need a solution that integrates clinical, financial and operational data across their hospitals and health systems; the majority of EHR systems cannot do that.”
“Hospitals are making necessary investments in infrastructure to meet the demands of this new generation of healthcare,” he added. “These investments are targeting health IT to provide more connected and efficient patient care, and modern clinical equipment that can deliver improved outcomes.”
The Nebraska study plans to provide hope for providers who want to deliver efficient care to their patients with the EHRs that they already have while avoiding the unintended consequences of health IT adoption.  “The EHR impacts not only physicians, but it affects nurses, technologists, pharmacists and the overall effect is a much larger impact,” Windle said.  “There is potential for the EHR to do good things. I think the impact of this small grant is going to ripple. We’re just learning how to appropriately use this very powerful technology.”
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureClinical InformaticsEHR OptimizationEHR Use


