Standard instruction sheet improves medication adherence

June 18, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
June 18, 2014 - Providing patients with a standardized, color-coded instruction sheet before surgery can help them understand which long-term medications to take prior to hospitalization and which to discontinue, finds a new study published in Anesthesiology.  The practice can help hospitals avoid the costs of canceled and rescheduled surgeries while reducing the likelihood of post-surgical complications and longer lengths of stay.
“Certain long-term medications should be continued on the day of surgery, and some should be temporarily stopped, but there is no consistency in how patients receive medication instructions before surgery,” said Thomas Vetter, MD, MPH, lead author on the study and an anesthesiologist from the University of Alabama at Birmingham. “Physician anesthesiologists are responsible for assessing and optimizing patients’ preoperative medications, including maximizing their compliance with physicians’ instructions. Our effort to enhance patients’ understanding of medication use before surgery is important and can increase patient satisfaction by more actively engaging them in their own health care.”
The study found that 74% of patients who were supplied with a standardized medication list were compliant with the instructions on the day of their procedures, compared to just 60% of the control group.  Patients were less likely to stay in recovery for more than 90 minutes when they read their instructions, the study adds, although patients over the age of 65 actually showed lower levels of compliance.
An unrelated study in 2013 from the National Institutes of Health found that emergency room patients were 3.5 times more likely to adhere to instructions when given video directions as compared to written instructions, pointing to the important role that clarity and repetition can play in getting patients to care for themselves.  “Good discharge instructions may prevent subsequent hospitalizations and lessen repeat emergency department visits in an already overwhelmed system; however, the time it takes to provide detailed discharge instructions to each and every patient seen in the emergency department may be prohibitive,” wrote Dr. Clare Atzema of the University of Toronto.
Dig Deeper
21% of Patients See Medical Errors, but Providers Deny Responsibility
Are Clinical Trials Diverse Enough to Ensure Patient Safety?
30-Day Patient Mortality Rates Drop During Hospital Inspections
“Physician anesthesiologists and nurse practitioners typically deliver a lot of verbal information to patients preoperatively, often exceeding patients’ short-term memory,” said Vetter of his study, reiterating the importance of ensuring understanding before patients strike out on their own. “Our findings show that providing patients with a standardized instruction sheet, both written and verbally, with simple language can improve compliance significantly. However, we speculate that a more concerted effort may be required to improve preoperative medication compliance in certain patients such as the geriatric population.”
Tagged Hospital QualityPatient EngagementPatient Safety


