HIMSS: ONC must focus on data standards, quality, and safety

September 22, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
September 22, 2014 - The Office of the National Coordinator (ONC) must be adequately funded to continue its important work on interoperability and data standards, care quality, and patient safety, writes HIMSS in a letter to Congress.   The letter urges lawmakers to approve the ONC’s $75 million budget for 2015 in order to help continue the healthcare industry’s progress towards connected, data-driven, high quality care.
“As the nation enters the fourth year and Stage 2 (of three stages) of the Meaningful Use (MU) Program, we are at a critical juncture in using IT to improve patient care outcomes via nationwide adoption of EHRs and creating the ability to exchange health information privately and securely,” the letter says. “As a nation, we must maintain the momentum that has been achieved and continue to address critical issues to realize the benefits of the substantial public and private investment that has been made in positively transforming America’s healthcare delivery system through IT.”
HIMSS reiterates the ONC’s top priorities, including the facilitation of interoperability through the adoption of industry-wide data standards, such as HL7, that promote health information exchange and enable clinical analytics.  The adoption of data standards is a large part of the ONC’s 10-year plan for a “learning health system” founded upon data analytics and an eye towards population health management. “There is much work to do to see that every person and their care providers can get appropriate health information in an electronic format when and how they need it to make care convenient and well-coordinated and allow for improvements in overall health,” National Coordinator Dr. Karen DeSalvo wrote in June.
Quality reporting standards are equally important for bringing that vision to fruition, HIMSS adds.  The ONC leads the effort “to define quality reporting measures considering all of these factors: appropriateness, availability, continuity, effectiveness, efficiency, safety, timeliness, patient satisfaction, health improvement, and consistency with technical standards and value.”  Developing strategies to prevent unintentional patient safety and care quality consequences while achieving the value proposition of health IT is also a crucial part of the ONC’s mission, and requires adequate investment from the nation in order to thrive in the changing healthcare landscape.
  Tagged Analytics InfrastructureBig DataClinical AnalyticsPatient Safety


