Better patient safety needs clinical analytics, cultural change

August 12, 2014

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 12, 2014 - Much of the recent buzz around keeping patients healthier for longer has revolved around how patients manage their own care between provider visits.  Keeping patients out of the hospital with more robust primary care and better patient engagement tools is certainly an admirable goal, but what about the patients who do land in the hospital – and what about those who don’t come out again due to errors committed by clinical staff?
Nearly one in three patients experience a patient safety incident in a hospital, but just 24% of hospital leaders say their clinical analytics technology is capable of identifying detailed patterns in behavior that lead to patient harm, says Dr. David Classen, Chief Information Officer at Pascal Metrics.  With the financial impacts running upwards of $100 billion a year, providers are desperately seeking ways to keep patients healthy and safe from medication overdoses, sepsis, superbugs, and human error.
Dr. Classen spoke to HealthITAnalytics about why it is vitally important for hospitals to address safety issues, both for the good of the patient and the good of the organization’s bottom line.
How will providers be impacted financially if they have poor patient safety records?
We have some new data coming that will suggest that if you’re one of the new accountable care organizations(ACO) and you’re not tracking safety problems closely, you’re probably going to suffer significant cost consequences.  In an ACO world, it may become a critical success factor to be able to track the safety problems as they occur, leveraging that from health IT.  If you don’t, you’ll suffer a financial penalty.
READ MORE: EHR Analytics Track C. Diff Patients to Flag Infection Trends
In addition, on October 1, Medicare starts a new safety reimbursement program called the HAC program that will be used to penalize hospitals.  This safety measurement program will be part of the Medicare value-based purchasing program.  And hospitals can lose up to one percent of their Medicare revenue based on this safety measure.  Medicare has had a value-based purchasing program for a number of years, and they’ve added things to it over the years.  This year, they’re going to add the safety parameter.  And I haven’t heard people talk much about it.
Big hospitals and surgical hospitals and academic centers will be impacted by this program and may lose millions because it will impact up to one percent of their Medicare revenue.  These hospitals will more likely rank lower among all the hospitals in the country, and the bottom 25 percent of hospitals in this program will get a one percent penalty of all Medicare revenue.  That’s a lot of money.
What are the problems with the current methods of patient safety reporting?
Currently, patient safety reporting is retrospective.  We have an incident, we investigate it after the fact, and we try to deal with it.  What if you could show people in real-time, with a dashboard or something else, that a patient is having a safety problem right now?  That’s a big cultural change.  We’re not used to doing that, yet other industries such as aviation do it routinely.
That’s a big change to deal with that because you have to find a way to insert that into workflow and say to people, “Guess what?  We’re not show you incident reports anymore two months later.  We’re going to show you today who’s having a safety problem.”
READ MORE: Vendors Push Big Data Analytics, but Hospitals Focus on Safety, Security
There has to be a way to leverage technology or uncover these problems that doesn’t put such a burden on frontline staff.  That’s the challenge.  A number of places have gone a great distance in changing the culture and saying that they really are interested in these incident reports.  But even in those places, staff only picks up about ten percent of problems.  So even when you deal with the cultural issue, there is still the issue of workflow.  People will say, “I don’t have time to do all this, plus everything else I’m supposed to do.”
In the places that have done this well, staff members tend to report all problems regardless of who caused them, but one of the things you have to overcome is encouraging people to report problems in a blame-free environment.  Clearly, that is a cultural change that needs to happen.  And a number of organizations have created much more of a blame-free culture, where staff can report things and not be held to blame for it.  The challenge is that the frontline staff is so busy, if you wanted them to report every safety problem they encountered, they would do nothing but that and not be able to take care of patients.
How are changing reimbursement models affecting the way providers deal with safety issues?
In the old days, if you had a safety complication, you would just charge the insurers more for it.  That’s the way it worked.  The more complicated the patient, the more the insurers will pay.  The insurers and other payors have wised up on this, and they’ve really cut back on paying for complications.  In addition, Medicare with its HAC program has been and will increasingly be penalizing hospitals for complications as outlined above.  So I think that begins the shift in thinking that safety problems can generate more revenue.  They will not.
Organizations will increasingly lose money on them.  And if you become an ACO, you might lose a whole lot of money on them.  Imagine that you have a safety problem with one of your patients in the hospital, and it leads them to have two rehospitalizations in the next three months.  In a lot of the ACO models, the health system is eating the whole cost of those hospitalizations. That’s when you really begin to attract people’s attention.  If you have safety problems in the hospital, guess what?  There is a downstream effect that goes on for months.
READ MORE: Machine Learning Can Flag Adverse Drug Events in Unstructured Data
What type of cultural change is necessary to truly address patient safety?
If you’re a hospital and your incident reporting system is only catching five percent of things, you probably think you’re doing just fine.  Your incident report numbers are low, so why would you need to invest any further? You could ask yourself why you would want to invest in something that’ll dramatically increase the number of events I’ll find.  It’ll make me look bad.  That’s a common refrain.  “It’ll just make me look bad.”  You’re right.  It will.  You have to look bad to find the problem to get better.  Because if you’re not seeing all the problems, then you’re not identifying all the areas where you can improve and save money.   I do think that there is a voyage of discovery that has to occur here.
That can then help justify the investment in systems that can help with this.  I think that EHR vendors will create this functionality.  Clinical analytics vendors will create this functionality as well.  But senior management has to be convinced that there is a real problem here, and a financial justification. Without it, they won’t.  As we move from rewarding volume to rewarding value, I think there will be more and more of a business case to do something about this.
Tagged Analytics InfrastructureHospital QualityPatient Safety


