Big Data Predictive Analytics Score Flags 30-Day Readmissions

August 20, 2015

By Jennifer Bresnick
August 20, 2015 - Big data analytics researchers at the University of Washington Tacoma are introducing a new way to predict the return of congestive heart failure patients to the hospital within the critical 30-day readmissions window.  Dubbed the “Risk-o-Meter,” the predictive analytics algorithm leverages machine learning based Microsoft technology to provide a simple, color-coded risk score to clinicians and patients.
“The motivation to use data mining on health care data emerged from a series of discussions in the classroom with students who were already working or interning at MultiCare [Health System],” said Ankur Teredesai, Director of the UW Tacoma Center for Data Science, which enlists the help of students and researchers to tackle big data analytics problems in healthcare and elsewhere.
With the help of healthcare executives at MultiCare who provided clinical background for the project, “we started exploring predictive modeling on clinical data and soon had breakthrough ideas,” Teredesai continued to UW Tacoma News.
“We had to understand what congestive heart failure means and how it is different from cardiac heart failure, for example. We were able to develop a set of qualitative and quantitative measures that are important for diagnosing and understanding the disease.”
The predictive risk score uses several common clinical and demographic metrics, including age, gender, BMI, blood pressure, and comorbidities to calculate the potential for another hospital stay within 30 days.  The Risk-o-Meter can also function without the inclusion of certain variables, making it useful for patients who may not know every single one of their vital signs off hand.
READ MORE: Does Social Determinants Data Enhance Population Health Analytics?
The algorithm then produces a risk score after comparing the patient’s submitted data to millions of other background cases in the data set.  With a single number and corresponding red, yellow, or green color-coding, both patients and clinicians can easily understand how lifestyle and clinical factors affect the likelihood of readmission.
“There are a lot of factors that go into your risk of readmissions,” said David Hazel, Managing Director at the center for Web and Data Science in a web presentation.  “Your age, your gender, your socioeconomic status…and some of those you can’t change.  But other things, like smoking or your diet, you can.  So by playing with this took, a clinician can show a patient that if they adjust their alcohol intake, if they stop smoking, or if they eat more fruits and vegetables, that will reduce their risk of rehospitalization.”
The risk score is not the first of its kind to emerge from academic research institutes and hospitals seeking more efficient, automated ways to stratify patients and manage population health.  Healthcare organizations have been paying particular attention to high-cost chronic diseases, like cardiac conditions, and to technologies that have the potential to reduce 30-day readmissions, which carry financial penalties with them.
Teredesai believes this eagerness to embrace predictive analytics presents a financial opportunity to those who produce meaningful useful tools that can be easily integrated into electronic health records and other health IT infrastructure.  “We are launching what we call ‘readmission score as-a-service’,” he said. “This would enable anyone from health care providers to insurers to mobile app developers to connect to our service and use the bank of predictive models. Our vision is to expand this research to attack other chronic conditions, integrate more varied data sources, and make the cloud the de-facto research infrastructure for health care.”
The researchers are just at the beginning of their work to make the predictive analytics risk score a useful tool for clinical practice.  “In addition to predicting readmission, we’re going to work on predicting initial admission,” Hazel added.  “We’re going to work on flagging patients very early on so we can have them more closely monitored.  We want to get these tools out and deployed in the clinical environment so they can actually be used by doctors and nurses.”
READ MORE: Duke Health Achieves Stage 7 Maturity Score from HIMSS Analytics
“Right now it’s been plugged in with this particular data set, and that’s why it’s predicting risk of readmission for congestive heart failure patients,” said Dr. Senjuti Basu Roy, Co-Principle Investigator and Assistant Professor.  “But if we plug it in with a different data set for a different disease or clinical risk factor, the Risk-o-Meter should also be able to work with that successfully.  So the potential is very high, and we’re still exploring.”
Tagged Big Data AnalyticsClinical AnalyticsPopulation Health ManagementPredictive Analytics


