Blockchain…A Techno-Philosophy For Our Time…

September 11, 2017

Extracts from an esoteric conversation between Fintnews and Gabriel Dusil of Adelphoi.io

 Fintnews: I’ve been watching American Gods, just to catch up on human affairs, and it’s sent my mind into an esoteric place, which is ideal for thinking about blockchain.

 Gabriel: Some people leaving school … see blockchain as their destiny, … they will never have a centralised brick and mortar job, … blockchain represents an ideology and a philosophy and a lifestyle…. The ambitions of it as a technology are reflected in the ambitions of the adopters.

 Fintnews: Right there you show it clearly, blockchain is more than a technology, it’s much more than that for some people, closer to a religion or belief system.

 Gabriel: Blockchain technology only scratches the surface of what the whole thing is about…
database,… chaining, … nodes, [it] only scratches the surface. It’s really about the ideology and the ideology is still very much shaping itself, as is the technological representation of it…. Blockchain is a much bigger movement than the technology,… blockchain is … a technological translation of a neointernet ideology.

 Fintnews: It’s almost as if someone developed software based on the teachings of the Buddha. it’s a lifestyle, a way of thinking and being, a guide to make decisions by, and because it’s a technology with commercial applications, it’s a way to earn money, and to create money, literally. It comes with its own currency built in. A way then to achieve freedom for the followers and devotees, who in turn create more of the blockchain systems.

 Gabriel: Blockchain is software as a philosophy. And philosophy as a software. And that, when you think about it, is extraordinary.

 Fintnews: It’s a fact that blockchain and its siamese twin currency, Bitcoin, were conceived and created by a mystic, Satoshi Nakamoto, who may or may not be a man, or a number of men, or a group of men and women, or a woman, or none of the above. Like any true mystic, there’s theories. Some have stood up and claimed to be Satoshi, only to sit back down again a few days later. Some say Satoshi is a CIA project, largely because Satoshi Nakamoto loosely translates as ‘Central Intelligence’, if you want it to, and because whoever he/she/it is, they certainly know how to make change.

 Is it about time? Intriguing, is it not, how the blocks on the chain resemble encapsulations of shared experience, like frames on an old movie reel, each one an immutable record of what happened, each one a Truth, that can be revisited, and experienced, and held as, yes, this is what happened, we were there.

 And perhaps on a macro scale, a technological representation of the continuum of time itself. And this eloquent delivery of double truth is recognised by some as a thing of import, as a way to live and create more of the way, as a means to be free and to create freedom, as a system to speak to, and with, and through, a system with truth inside, a higher truth, a higher meaning.

 “And these devotees understand the scriptures of the code, and hold it immutable, a foundation upon which to build their own node heart’s desires… on this Block they build their lives, and with these Chains they set themselves free, and the technology platforms are their churches and temples…” So strange and so mystical. Hybrid technology religions. Why is that not even surprising?

 The Fintech Times, they have never been so … changing.

 Gabriel Dusil, CEO, Adelphoi https://adelphoi.io/

 Originally printed in the 15th edition of The FintechTimes


