Banking on a Digital Transformation Strategy? These 4 Steps Can Help.

January 11, 2017

The “innovate-or-die” mantra is even more resonant in the banking industry than most. That’s why finance companies, faced with the possibility that a young digital upstart could eat their lunch (as Uber has for taxis, and Airbnb for hotels), are investigating third-platform apps by the hundreds.

 On the lending side, for example, new consumer platforms such as Prosper, Lending Club and Marlette Funding have left traditional banks suddenly playing catch-up on using digital technology to improve customer experience and gain digital efficiencies (full disclosure: Marlette Funding is a client of my firm).

 Meanwhile, the era of Facebook and Twitter has ushered in a new desire by customers to use their smartphones for both communications and conducting business wherever and whenever they want, and they expect the companies they do business with to keep up. Companies are keenly aware that they need to accelerate their ability to attract and retain customers.

 Done properly, a strategic digital transformation can help banks meet the evolving needs of their customer base. It can also help reduce expenses and optimize lending practices that enable them to offer their customers benefits like lower fees and lower rates.
Through our experience with financial institutions, we’ve identified four key steps to smooth the transition from legacy processes and systems to cutting-edge digital solutions:

  

 One advantage of an online platform is that features and functionality can easily be added at any time. When introducing something new, it’s easier for customers to grasp just a few new features at first, adding more features once customers are accustomed to the initial changes. This phased approach also enables developers to study how users interact with the first features, enabling them to adjust follow-on features accordingly.

 Banks were one of the first industries to adopt computers in the 1960s. Today, as the banking business is being revolutionized again by digital technology, following these four steps can help you roll with the changes and come out ahead. You can bank on it.

 Bret Waters,

 Tivix


