Contis Group starts the New Year by announcing full PCI-DSS certification across all operations in UK, USA and India

February 12, 2016

“Contis Group is determined to be a global leader in alternative payments. In achieving this goal, it is vital that we can offer full PCI certification and peace of mind of secure cardholder data management for all our current and future major payment projects with governments and leading global brands.

 Contis Group has gained major contracts from international brands and has become the backbone of many of the new exciting Fintech start-ups, who are changing the face of financial transactions across the world.  Our PCI accreditation will greatly add value to their business offering by accessing the real world of payments through our secure global Visa and banking connectivity and advanced APIs.  I am sure this accreditation will also assist many start-ups in gaining funding, as potential investors can see they are closely linked to the Contis Group – a highly credible provider.

 As  a Principal Member of, and shareholder in, Visa Europe, Contis has the capability of directly issuing Visa prepaid and debit cards in all European territories, through its fully passported  FCA regulated EU E-Money licence. Contis is a certified Visa card processor for Europe. The products and services are cloud based, so are globally deployable.

 Contis’ one-stop capabilities allow the group to design and deliver bespoke compliant payment solutions, using its own intellectual property for mobile, web and Visa network payments processing, whilst offering all customer service functions internally through its UK call centre and Latvian facility.

 Contis Group is truly a unique business; and is one of the few companies in the world that can deliver a full card and alternative banking ‘white label’ solution without touching external resources.  A true ‘total control’ offering for business needs.”

 [author title=”Contis Group” image=”http://”]Contis Group is a provider of prepaid debit card programmes. They manage all aspects of your prepaid programme, from issuing, licensing and payment processing through to programme management and consultancy.[/author]


