The world of Blockchain and Crypto descends on Ukraine

June 6, 2017

Leading experts from over 20 countries will gather in Odessa (Ukraine) over July 5-6th

 An international conference for professionals working with Blockchain and Crypto – rejoicing in the name of the Blockchain Incredible Party (BIP 001) – returns to Ukraine this year for a fifth time. The main aim of the event is to bring together like-minded professionals from all over the world.

 Taking place in Odessa (Ukraine), the conference is expanding along with the industry, to cover the hottest industry topics. Eighty global visionaries and opinion leaders, representing over 20 countries, will gather together to share insights, debate the future, and chew over recent trends and threats in the industry.

 “We’re delighted to be back for the fifth BIP001 event”, says Pavel Kravchenko, founder of event organisers, Distributed Lab. “Consolidating the lineup of our international events, BIP001 will bring together Blockchain and Crypto leaders from around the globe for three intense days of networking and deal-making.”

 The event’s agenda is restricted to professionals only, and is primarily about application or enhancement of Blockchain technology in various domains.

 Early confirmed keynote speakers are: Vlad Zamfir – a world-famous Ethereum expert, a Blockchain architect at Ethereum, working on blockchain efficiency and scaling. Frank Schwab – a world-recognised FinTech expert, regularly named among 40 global TOP FinTech professionals. Previously heading-up strategy processes at Deutsche Bank, McKinsey and Fidor bank, these days Frank creates digital banking strategies and helps FinTechs to navigate the banking industry. Charles Hoskinson – a highly distinguished technology entrepreneur and mathematician. Founder of Invictus Innovations, Ethereum and IOHK, Charles’s current projects focus on education for cryptocurrency topics, evangelism of decentralisation, and making cryptographic tools easier for mainstream use. Giacomo Zucco – an eminent Bitcoin evangelist, technology consultant, an early crypto industry expert, and former Head of Business Development of the GreenAddress start-up. Giacomo Zucco is currently CEO at BlockchainLab.it whose aim is to maintain the technology-level Blockchain ecosystem. Many more inspirational speakers will be announced on the BIP001 website.

 A highlight aspect of the BIP001 summer edition is the exciting entertainment programme.  “BIP001 stands for Blockchain Incredible Party. So get ready to spend at least 3 great evenings celebrating,” adds Lilia Vershinina, founder of Distributed Lab and BIP001 organiser. “The very dynamic and informative conference programme will be supplemented with lots of free-format networking and discussions, pre- and after-parties taking place at top venues – including the best open-air night club in Eastern Europe – Ibiza.”

 BIP001 remains Ukraine’s leading Blockchain and Crypto edutainment event. Don’t miss this terrific opportunity to engage with the very best global experts.

 Distributed Lab is a crypto- & decentralised technology expertise centre, with primary activities focussing on creation of digital payment infrastructures, and the application of blockchain tech to business problems.

 DL builds solutions on popular blockchains — Bitcoin, Ethereum, Hyperledger, Ripple, Monero, Stellar, PeerCoin, BitShares, NXT- as well as building custom ones.

 DL’s mission is in creating an open ecosystem that uses uniform payment protocols facilitating trade and value transfers – so called “financial web”. The company resolves issues in the global payment infrastructure accessibility and security, and create turnkey solutions which include integration into legacy frameworks, business architecture creation and user experience (design, frontend, mobile apps).

 DL organises dozens of seminars in Ukraine and globally.

 For more information, please contact: 

 Lilia Vershinina

 lilia@distributedlab.com / +38 099 614 55 96

 For more, visit the BIP001 website


