Health Tech revolution is here!

December 20, 2016

The AXA PPP Health Tech & You programme discovers, promotes and supports health tech inventors and innovations from across the world. Founded by three leaders in their fields, AXA PPP healthcare, Design Museum and 2020health, their mission is to grow awareness of digital health and to help people understand how technology can give them more control of their health and wellbeing.

 This year there are 5 fantastic categories for you to enter. Health Tech & You Awards 2017 is looking for the best health technology that has the potential to or is already making a huge difference to people’s lives. Join the health tech revolution now!

  

 2017 Awards:

 AXA PPP Health Tech & You Awards 2017 entries close on the 16th January. Hurry up!

 Explore the different categories below to see which one fits your health tech best. Please note you can only enter your health tech into one category so please choose carefully.

  

 Health tech is making a genuine difference to people’s lives right now. We’re keeping a close eye on what products are being raved about on social media. So if your health tech is winning fans and improving people’s health and wellbeing or you are the user of health tech which is improving your quality of life then it’s time to give the tech the recognition it deserves.

  

 In partnership with Helen Hamlyn Centre for Design – Royal College of Art, this category looks for products, services, systems or devices that address future health challenges in a narrative, imaginative and human-centred way. Although ideas can have some sense of speculation, they should address a real issue and show evidence of development with real people, whether users, clinicians or other stakeholders.Highly innovative ideas are encouraged, that push the boundaries of health tech, providing a clear vision as to how people’s lives can be supported in new and interesting ways. This is a pathfinding category open to submission from all types of individuals or organisations with a creative idea.

  

 AXA PPP healthcare understand the many health and wellbeing challenges people experience. Each year AXA PPP Health Tech & You highlights the most pressing current challenges, and invites the health tech community to tell us why their innovations are best placed to tackle them.This year, in partnership with innovation accelerator The Bakery, we’re looking for the next big innovation that will help people live life well by managing manage their own health – technologies that inspire people to stay healthy, get better or support them when they’re unwell.As people are increasingly connected, we’re looking for digital tools, applications and devices that will support people in sickness and in health – not only helping them get better, but helping them stay healthy in the first place.

 CHALLENGES

 Challenge 1. Can your technology inspire people to care for their wellbeing, move, eat and sleep better, and motivate them to stay healthy for good?

 Challenge 2. Can your technology help people get better, from detecting an illness to understanding their condition or their symptoms, all the way to encouraging them to follow their treatment?

 Challenge 3. Can your technology provide support to people who need it the most, and help them manage long-term conditions or chronic diseases? If you think you have a solution to one of these challenges, please apply and let us know how you would change the way people manage their health, for good.

  

 This category highlights a health technology which is highly valued by health and care professionals. In partnership with Roy Lilley’s pioneering Academy of Fabulous Stuff, together we are looking for the person-focused health technology which professionals think has made a significant difference to care. It does not have to be high-tech but must be patient focused. The Academy of Fabulous Stuff is a platform on which professionals can share and search innovation, ideas and solutions. It has become a major social movement and is considered a key change platform for the NHS and Social Care.

  

 Thanks to health tech, people after retirement have never had as much control over their own health and wellbeing as they do now.In partnership with The Age of No Retirement this category aims to identify excellence in design innovation and technical adaption of health tech that can support independent living as we get older.The Age of No Retirement is a design-led movement for intergenerational social change. Their aim is to create a world where age does not matter, where people of all ages share equal opportunities and participate equally in a richer, more engaged society. They collaborate across all sectors on strategies, products, services and processes that address the needs of people of all ages – workers, citizens, consumers. We’re proud to have them supporting this category to encourage a new era of intergenerational innovation. If you have developed or are developing an innovation that is helping to support and care for people as they get older, we strongly encourage you to apply. There are two routes for entry, either directly through the website which is open for entries. Or next month, the Age of No Retirement will be launching a new open challenge on their crowdsourcing platform – The Age of Action. The challenge will seek to discover new inventions and innovations to support the millions of people in the UK who are caring for loved ones. Further details will be announced shortly, but if you want to be sure you are first to receive this challenge, please send your name and email to act@ageofnoretirement.org so you can be on their mailing list.

  

 You can’t enter this award. You can only win it by your health tech innovation being, well, wow!As they review all the entries to the other Health Tech & You categories, our judges are keeping an eye out for some truly stand-out, disruptive innovations. The kind of entries that will have everyone talking. There are always a few and they’ll find their way into this category…

  

  

 Benefits of being shortlisted

  Previous finalists and winners of the Awards programme have enjoyed these benefits:

  

 Everyone including students, inventors and business is welcome to apply.

 All categories are open for entry until 16th January 2017; so, enter now and good luck!


