The financial ecosystem Exscudo has launched a helpdesk for its customers

June 20, 2017

Exscudo is the nextgen financial ecosystem that unites the traditional financial system and the cybercurrency market. The main goal of the project is to create a single gate to cybercurrency market for simple users, professional traders, investors and financial institutions. Exscudo’s ecosystem consists of a Stock exchange, as well as a merchant, wallets, trading terminals, cards and a protected communication channel.

 The Exscudo team has launched an automatic helpdesk to provide for quick customer assistance.

 The Helpdesk team deals with technical problems of Exscudo customers. There are two ways of sending an inquiry: sending an email to help@exscudo.com or creating an issue on http://help.exscudo.com. The help desk web page requires an additional registration with the same email address as used within Exscudo but it is not directly connected to the Exscudo accounts.

 Requests are solved within 3 business days after receipt, in accordance with the SLA rules. However, the average solution time is now 24-48 hours.

 “Our goal is to get the average resolution time down to 24 hours, and the time of the first response to 8 hours, when the Exchange is launched”, – comments Alex Sitnikov, CTO of Exscudo. “The automatic helpdesk allows our customers to track how their inquiries are being solved, and makes sure that we haven’t missed anything ourselves”.

 Exscudo also encourages its customers to share their ideas about the project using Helpdesk. All suggestions concerning new functionality and features will be registered and reviewed by the team. If a specific feature is proposed by many users, it will be included into the project’s road map.

 “We want to develop our products in collaboration with the community”, – said Andrew Zimine, CEO of Exscudo, – “We are creating services for people. Services that will facilitate the everyday life of our customers. This is why we value any feedback we receive from the community and encourage our users to let us know any ideas they would like to have implemented in Exscudo”.


