FSS launches Paynalytix-As-a-Service to maximize business performance

May 4, 2018

Financial Software & Systems (FSS), a global company who specialise in payments technology and transaction processing, announced the launch of Paynalytix-As-a-Service at Seamless Middle East, the region’s premier industry event in Dubai.  FSS Paynalytix-As-a Service brings multi-source, multi-format data together in the cloud and helps banks harness the value of their data for improved business outcomes.

 With the growth of digital payments, banks have a plethora of data available from an increasing number of digital payment sources including issuance and acquiring systems. FSS Paynalytix-As-a-Service leverages Paynalytix, an advanced big-data platform to help banks efficiently model performance along multiple business and operational dimensions. The solution synthesizes data from the Switch and multiple payment applications including Mobile Banking, Internet Banking, Card Management Systems, ATM Monitoring Systems, Payment Reconciliation Systems, Payment Gateways and POS to generate actionable insights for maximizing revenues as well as driving operational efficiencies.

 Intuitive data visualization dashboards provide on-demand access to insights to a range of authorized end users, making it easy for various business units within financial institutions to analyze operational performance, fraudulent transactions, channel profitability and the end-customer experience.

 Speaking on the launch, Suresh Rajagopalan, President Software Products, stated; “In an age of payments disruption, analytics is at the core of innovation and differentiation. FSS Paynalytix-As-a-Service helps banks achieve success by bringing a culture of data-driven decisioning at scale. By exploiting vast underutilized repositories of transaction data, we can help banks carve new business models and services and transform their go-to- market approach.”

 FSS Paynalytix-As-a-Service offers pre-built applications to help banks accelerate time-to-value. These include:

 FSS’ Paynalytix-As-a-Service platform is available on an outcome-based ‘pay-per-insight’ cloud delivery model. Banks can use pre-built applications or leverage FSS expertise in Payments and Big Data to develop new applications over the platform.  

 About FSS

 Financial Software and Systems (FSS) is a global company who specialise in payments technology and transaction processing, offering a diversified portfolio of software products, hosted payment services and software services built over 25 years of comprehensive experience across payments spectrum.

 FSS, through its innovative products and services, caters to the wholesale and retail payments initiatives of leading banks, financial institutions, processors, merchants, governments and regulatory bodies. Its end-to-end payments suite powers retail delivery channels such as ATM, POS, Internet, Mobile and Financial Inclusion as well as critical back-end functions such as cards management, reconciliation, settlement, merchant management and device monitoring.

 Headquartered in Chennai, India, the company services 100+ customers across the globe, which include leading public and private sector banks in India and some of the large Banks, FIs, Processors and Prepaid Card issuers are customers of FSS across North America, UK/Europe, ME/Africa and APAC and has a team of over 2500 experts serving the clients across the globe.


