VST Enterprises founder named Science and Tech Ambassador to Zimbabwe Government

March 8, 2018

Hon. Louis-James Davis, founder and CEO of Manchester-based consumer technology and security company, VST Enterprises, has been named as the new Science and Technology Ambassador to the Zimbabwean Government.

 The ambassadorship was granted to Louis-James at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland in January, followed by a formal ceremony in the capital of Zimbabwe, Harare which will take place at the end of March. The ceremony is set to be attended by ministers and government officials, as well as representatives of the Zimbabwean press corps. The honour follows some 12 months of close co-operation between VST Enterprises and authorities in Zimbabwe to develop innovative ways to address key economic challenges in the country through VCode®, the company’s cutting-edge authentication technology.

 Commenting on the ambassadorship, Emmerson Mnangagwa, the President of Zimbabwe, explained: “Louis-James and his company, VST Enterprises, have been a crucial support to the Zimbabwean government in recent months, as we continue our work to rebuild our country’s economy. The solutions Louis-James and his team are developing are truly at the cutting edge of technology, helping to go a long way towards tackling the challenges hindering Zimbabwe’s economic recovery. 

 “Now, as our new Science and Technology Ambassador, Louis-James will be able to take this work even further, operating in partnership with the government in a wide array of areas to find even more innovative ways to further improve the lives of the Zimbabwean people and lay the foundations for a happier, more prosperous future for the nation.”

 VCode was awarded the EU Seal of Excellence for its anti-counterfeiting and end-to-end supply chain and traceability capabilities, and has been commended by UK Prime Minister Theresa May. A completely secure means of verification, information held within the VCode® can be set and tracked in real-time in the cloud-based tracking portal, the VPlatform.

 With VST Enterprises, Louis-James will be implementing VCode to tackle illegal mining, counterfeiting and issues with border control, as well as introducing identity cards and tax collection for informal businesses to provide life-changing benefits – such as new infrastructure, schools and a boost in the economy – for the entire population.

 Louis-James added: “The way the new government has embraced innovative technology is a testament to its commitment to putting the Zimbabwean economy back on its feet.

 ”We are proud of the work we’ve done so far to support the country in this goal. We’re looking forward to leveraging this new honour to do even more to help the people of Zimbabwe create a prosperous future.”

 Louis-James has been celebrated for his technological innovation and business leadership, having recently been named as Manchester’s Entrepreneur of the Year, and the Chairman’s Rising Star for expanding VST Enterprises’ global presence to tackle the most prevailing issues in counterfeiting, fraud and money laundering.

 A dedicated philanthropist, Louis-James is Ambassador for KidScan Children’s Cancer Trust and Cancer Research UK, as well as promoting the next generation of technology entrepreneurs as a Creative, Digital & Health Care Technology Ambassador for the Manchester Metropolitan University.

 To find out more about VCode®, go to: https://vstenterprises.com/.


