Leeds tech conference FinTech North announced

March 15, 2017

FinTech North 2017 is once again set to take place during Leeds Digital Festival week and aims to attract 350 delegates and support from the FinTech community in the Leeds City Region, across the UK, and internationally.

 

 FinTech North 2017 will be hosted on the 26th April 2017 at aql in Leeds. The goal of the event is to generate collaboration and knowledge share within the financial services and technology community and to generate tangible economic benefits for the region.

 The agenda for the one day conference will feature a number of well-known keynote speakers who will cover topics including innovation, alternative finance, big data and analytics, machine learning, digital identity and authentication.

 BJSS, the award-winning, delivery-focused IT consultancy, has been confirmed as one of the headline sponsors of FinTech North, the one day conference taking place during Leeds Digital Festival on 26th April, organised by Leeds-based Whitecap Consulting and White Label Crowdfunding. Founded in 1993, BJSS employs over 700 people with offices across the UK and the US, delivering a wide range of IT services and tackling complex technology-related challenges in a variety of markets including financial services. It lists some of the world’s largest companies amongst its clients including investment banks, retail banks, government departments, retailers and commodity traders.

 BJSS will sponsor the FinTech North conference itself, along with a FinTech North networking event to be held in the run up to the event, and a private dinner for speakers and sponsors which will take place the evening before the conference. Other organisations to have pledged their support to the FinTech North conference include: aql, Computershare, BJSS, FiNexus, Munroe K, Leeds City Region Enterprise Partnership, West Yorkshire Combined Authority, Vocalink and Nostrum Group. Nesta’s Open Up Challenge has also been confirmed as a strategic partner.

 It was also announced by the organisers, Leeds-based Whitecap Consulting and White Label Crowdfunding, that Laura Bailey, CEO & Co-Founder of Zerado, and Stuart Sherman, CEO of IMC, join a speaker line up that already includes Christopher Woolard of the Financial Conduct Authority and Chris Sier of FiNexus, the government’s FinTech Envoy for the North of England.

 In 2016, Laura Bailey was named by Innovate Finance in their Power List of Women in FinTech. She is a commercial professional who specialises in driving company value and growth for the benefit of society. Zerado is a technology and consulting company specialising in Blockchain, Internet of Things and Artificial Intelligence. It uses the latest cryptographic, blockchain and cloud technologies to create enterprise products and processes.

 Stuart Sherman, CEO of IMC Business Architecture, will be flying in from Toronto to speak at FinTech North on the hot topic of Artificial Intelligence (AI). A serial entrepreneur, he has founded several global companies including an MIS business, a digital agency, a financial services firm, and latterly IMC. He leads a team of Social Scientists, Mathematicians, Cognitive Neuroscientists, Marketers, Interface Designers and Developers to help companies find the correct fit for AI inside of their existing organisational processes. IMC has offices in Canada, China, India and the UK, including a presence in Leeds.

 Registration for FinTech North can be found here 


