Guru appointed to head up comparison site

July 11, 2017

MoneyGuru.com has appointed an experienced channel director to lead its rapid expansion after a successful launch period. Having launched in August last year the site has enjoyed a successful first year and is now the fastest growing comparison site in the market. 

 The site has signalled its intention to disrupt the big four in the comparison market by appointing expert Deborah Vickers who has helped some of the biggest names in the market with optimisation and product development. Deborah, 35, from Northwich brings 13 years of experience in technology and IT to the role, many of these within the financial services sector. She started her career at industry leader MoneySupermarket.com as a service desk manager before working her way up to IT delivery manager during her eight year tenure.

 Following this Deborah went on to work for travel giant lastminute.com as optimisation manager, as well as developing her portfolio in online product development roles at Phones4u and DixonsCarphone, solidifying her comparison experience as data, analytics and optimisation manager at Zuto. Most recently Deborah was head of product at Unshackled.com where she led the product development from the idea stage to where the business stands today. Deborah’s role at MoneyGuru will be to lead the growth of the brand and expand the product offering. She will be tasked with bringing more providers onto the site and then rolling these offerings out to customers.

 Deborah said: “I was aware of MoneyGuru.com already thanks to its quirky and fun TV advert so when the opportunity came up I was immediately drawn to it. Having been named in the Sunday Times Best Companies to Work For, MoneyGuru.com also has a great reputation as an employer and this really drew me to the role…My role is to ensure that MoneyGuru.com is the partner of choice for all providers and make sure that our market-leading technology advancements go to market as soon as possible. Looking forward, I am hoping to explore other consumer offerings and products; we have some really ground-breaking things in the pipeline which I’m excited to be involved with.”

 “I’m really enjoying getting to know the talented MoneyGuru.com team and exploring the brand further and I’m looking forward to the challenges my new role will bring. MoneyGuru.com is already a strong brand, and as we build it and grow out the customer experience I believe we have the potential to be the leading consumer credit comparison site in the UK.”

 MoneyGuru.com is part of Quint Group, one of the UK’s most successful and fastest growing fintech businesses which was recently awarded a Queen’s Award for Enterprise in Innovation. Greg Cox, founder of MoneyGuru.com and chief executive and co-founder of Quint, said: “We’re delighted to welcome Deborah to the MoneyGuru.com team. She brings a wealth of experience with her from the comparison site market, as well as having worked in technology and IT with some huge brands and will be an integral part of the growth of the company.

 At MoneyGuru.com we’re always looking for the best talent in the sector to help us achieve our goals and complement our exceptional existing workforce. “What sets us apart from our competitors is the innovative technology that sits on the site. We are continually developing new technology to improve our offering and Deborah’s product and technology background will help us achieve this.”

 Finlay Magowan Quint Group


