DIA Munich: Insurance start to apply insurtech at scale

November 19, 2017

No less than 1,000 Decision makers of more than 250 companies representing 40 countries from all 6 continents turned the third edition of Digital Insurance Agenda (DIA) into a massive success. DIA, the largest ‘must see’ insurtech event worldwide took place at 15 and 16 November in Munich and set the stage for the most important digital developments in the years to come. More than 50 insurtechs presented solutions that will accelerate innovation in insurance. Technologies on stage varied from artificial intelligence and drones in P&C insurance to chatbots and connected devices.

 “The DIA line-up and the massive response among the audience show that insurtech is now mainstream. This edition clearly showed the rise of insurtechs that are active in the life and health insurance sector. Plus an ever growing attention for artificial intelligence, machine learning and other shapes of advanced analytics”, summarizes DIA co-founder Reggy de Feniks.

 “The live demos at DIA made definitely made clear that insurance is at the brink of being applied at scale. Many of the insurtechs at DIA presented applications that drive operational excellence and customer engagement simultaneously. Platform thinking, thinking beyond insurance and creating new insurtech enabled services will be the next challenge for insurers”, says Roger Peverelli, the other DIA-co-founder.

 DIAmond Award winners
The many insurers and insurtech investors in the DIA audience awarded six insurtechs the DIAmond Award for insurtech with most strategic impact:

 About DIA
DIA – Digital Insurance Agenda, www.digitalinsuranceagenda.com – is the leading worldwide conference for insurtech and innovation in insurance. The purpose of DIA is to accelerate innovation in insurance, by connecting insurance executives with insurtech leaders from all over the globe.
DIA is an initiative of Reggy de Feniks and Roger Peverelli. Peverelli and De Feniks are the authors of the worldwide bestseller Reinventing Financial Services and recently launched Reinventing Customer Engagement. The next level of digital transformation for banks and insurers. Peverelli and De Feniks are listed in the global top 50 Insurtech Influencers.
More than 1,000 participant from 40 geographies across the globe make DIA the single most important insurtech event worldwide for C-level and C-1 executives and change agents in the insurance sector.
DIA Munich attendees represent companies such as AEGON, Ageas, AlfaStrakhovanie, Allianz, AmTrust, Anbang, AVIVA, AXA, Baloise, BNP Paribas Cardif, DAS, Deutsche Rueck, Die Mobiliar, DKV, ERGO, Generali, Hannover Re, Helvetia, Mapfre, Munich Re, Nippon Life, NN Group, Sberbank Insurance, Swiss Re, Triglav, Unipol, VidaCaixa, and Zurich.


