Invest Hong Kong (InvestHK) announces details of its UK Fintech Awards 2018

February 16, 2018

Invest Hong Kong (InvestHK) announced details of its UK Fintech Awards 2018 (“the Awards”), organised in conjunction with the UK’s Department for International Trade, to tap the rich seam of Fintech talent in the UK and showcase the exciting opportunities Hong Kong presents as a conduit to Asia.

 The Awards are open for submissions from January 22 and close at 18:00 GMT on February 23. The best entries will be shortlisted to participate in a pitching competition judged by sector experts from both the UK and Hong Kong. The two winners of the Awards will be announced at a ceremony that will take place on March 20 at The Anthologist during the Innovate Finance Global Summit 2018 (IFGS) in London. Register to the ceremony here!

 The Awards follow the launch in September of the UK-Hong Kong Fintech Bridge (“the Bridge”) to foster closer collaboration at government, regulator and business level in the Fintech sector. Both the UK and Hong Kong are global financial centres with vibrant Fintech sectors that present huge opportunities in both markets.

 In this instance, the Bridge aims to encourage Fintech firms to use the facilities and explore new business opportunities in Hong Kong. For the Awards, key Fintech sponsors are Hong Kong Economic and Trade Office, London and Cathay Pacific; with partners Hong Kong’s Cyberport and London-based FINTECH Circle and Fintech Finance. They will participate in the selection process, and the programme of activities in Hong Kong for the winners.

 The two winners will be given complimentary flight tickets in business class to Hong Kong sponsored by Cathay Pacific, plus accommodation for five days. In Hong Kong, they will receive introductions, networking opportunities and sector expert counsel on how to expand and scale their business in and through Hong Kong to Asia and beyond.

 Thorsten Terweiden, InvestHK’s Deputy Head of Fintech and UK head, said: “We’re very excited about this new award, and about the possibility of introducing top Fintech talent from the UK to the range of opportunities that exist in Hong Kong. The experience will undoubtedly be hugely informative and helpful, but it will also be a real game changer for the winner.”

 To enter the competition, companies must be:

 Eligible companies are invited to submit a 3-to-5 page business plan that outlines their strengths and competencies in the following areas:

 Members of the judging panel:

 and more…

 Two Grand Prizes:

 Subsidised five-day bespoke programme to each company in Hong Kong with:

 Three Runners-up Prizes:

 For any enquiries, please contact Thorsten Terweiden, InvestHK’s fintech lead in London, at thorsten_terweiden@hketolondon.gov.hk or +44 (0)207 290 8209.


