SmartSearch wins prestigious Queen’s Enterprise Award for innovation

May 15, 2018

Anti-money laundering verification platform SmartSearch, have won Britain’s most coveted business award. The Leeds-based firm has joined an elite group of companies after being awarded the Queen’s Award for Enterprise.

 The award recognises businesses which have excelled in international trade, innovation, sustainable development or promoting opportunity and is the highest award for British businesses. SmartSearch has been recognised in the innovation category for developing an Anti-Money Laundering (AML) verification platform.

 SmartSearch’s unique AML solution brings together individual and business searches for the UK and International Markets with automatic Worldwide Sanction and PEP screening. It is already used by more than 3,000 businesses across the world with around 50 new clients coming on board each month. SmartSearch has already won five awards for its innovative technology, and last month was named one of Yorkshire’s fastest growing businesses following a 1,450% increase in turnover in just five years. As a result of its success, the company has also seen staff numbers grow from 7 to 90 and it has recently located to a new office; new build scheme in Ilkley.

 SmartSearch MD Martin Cheek, said: “We are extremely proud to have been given The Queen’s Award for Enterprise for Innovation; it is such a prestigious honour. SmartSearch has grown so fast over the past two years; this award really recognises that commercial achievement and is testimony to the hard work and dedication of our staff.”

 About SmartSearch

 SmartSearch is an anti-money laundering verification platform that conducts individual and business searches, both for the UK and international markets with automatic worldwide sanction and PEP screening.

 It is the only organisation in the UK with the ability to verify individuals and companies in the UK and internationally all in a single platform via a browser or API, with full Sanction, PEP and adverse media screening and then ongoing monitoring.

 In existence since 2011, it has won five awards for technology and is used by over 3,000 businesses.  This includes 25% of the top 200 law firms and one in three top accountancy firms. Turnover has increased dramatically; growth has been circa fourteen fold over the past six years.


