Visa Canada and Finn AI collaborate to expand artificial intelligence banking capabilities through Visa Developer

July 5, 2018

Visa Canada and Finn AI announced a strategic collaboration to enable new capabilities in conversational banking chatbots and artificial intelligence (AI), powered by the Visa Developer Platform.

 This collaboration will see the Vancouver-based fintech use Visa Developer Platform APIs to enhance their conversational AI technology to provide a more personalised experience for banks to interact with their customers, including re-imagining the travel experience for cardholders. For example, a customer could chat with a virtual assistant and follow an easy, intuitive process to ensure their cards are optimised while they are travelling; from turning on travel notifications before departing, retrieving foreign exchange rates while at the airport, and locating the nearest ATM at their destination.  A customer could even disable a misplaced card to ensure protection against fraudulent transactions through a simple, natural conversation.

 “The Visa Developer Platform is designed to provide open access to Visa’s technology for our partners to build more dynamic and seamless digitally enabled experiences for consumers,” said Derek Colfer, Head of Digital Product, Visa Canada. “We are proud to work with Finn AI and collaborate in the rapidly evolving AI and chatbot space. For consumers, this will mean a more relevant and personalised digital experience.”

 “We are very excited to team up with Visa Canada to leverage the Visa Developer APIs,” stated Jake Tyler, CEO at Finn AI. “This will help banks meet consumers’ needs on their terms, allowing them to set travel notifications, flag fraudulent transactions, manage subscriptions and more – as easily as chatting to their friends – 24/7 in the channels of their choice. This simple digital access delivers strong value to banks, reducing in-bound calls and helping them stay top of wallet.”

 

 About Visa Developer

 Visa Developer Platform (VDP) provides simplified access to many of Visa’s most in-demand products and services through an open network of Visa APIs, allowing anyone to transform great ideas into new digital commerce experiences.

 Over 100 of the most popular Visa capabilities are delivered through APIs for development and testing purposes, including capabilities in the following groups: commercial, data & analytics, ID intelligence, offers & benefits, payment methods, risk & fraud and trials.

 About Visa Inc.

 Visa Inc. (NYSE: V) is a digital payments service. Their mission is to connect the world through the most innovative, reliable and secure payment network – enabling individuals, businesses and economies to thrive. Visa Inc.’s advanced global processing network, VisaNet, provides secure and reliable payments around the world, and is capable of handling more than 65,000 transaction messages a second. The company’s relentless focus on innovation is a catalyst for the rapid growth of connected commerce on any device, and a driving force behind the dream of a cashless future for everyone, everywhere.  As the world moves from analog to digital, Visa is applying their brand, products, people, network and scale to reshape the future of commerce.

 About Finn AI

 Finn AI is an AI-powered virtual assistant built for personal banking and finance. Finn AI put a personal banker in every bank customer’s pocket, helping them to manage their money wherever they are, whatever they need – via a simple, natural conversation.

 The Finn AI team of data scientists, engineers, and financial industry experts helps banks and credit unions transform customer engagement and increase financial literacy, while delivering the convenience and savings of a digital-first experience.

 Today they have successful public deployments in three languages with a growing global customer base that includes ATB Financial, Bank of Montreal (BMO), Banpro Grupo Promerica, and Commonwealth Bank.


