DataArt recognised as one of 1,000 Companies to Inspire Britain 2018 by London Stock Exchange Group

May 30, 2018

Global technology consultancy DataArt has been selected for inclusion in the fifth edition of London Stock Exchange Group’s 1,000 Companies to Inspire Britainreport, showcasing the UK’s most inspiring and fastest growing companies.

 To be selected for the list, businesses had to demonstrate not only positive growth in revenue over the last three years but also outperform their sector peers. The list represents over 40 sectors from across every region in the UK.

 Dmitry Bagrov, Managing Director, DataArt UK, said: “It’s rewarding to be recognised for our dedication to sustaining and growing long-term relationships with clients across key industries. At DataArt, we pride ourselves in consistently providing innovative technology and business solutions for the most discerning customers.”

 DataArt’s UK clients include Ocado, Betfair, Paddy Power, skyscanner, IWG (Regus), Coller Capital, and British Gas Hive among others. In 2017, DataArt posted a record-breaking annual revenue of $124 ml. Over 600 new professionals joined DataArt in its 20 global locations, bringing the total headcount to 2,600.

 Nikhil Rathi, CEO of London Stock Exchange Group, said: “Our goal in producing the report is to continue to highlight, to as wide an audience as possible, the importance of fast-growing businesses to the future of the UK economy and the support they require. We believe that these companies have enormous potential for innovation, growth and job creation.”

 About DataArt

 DataArt is a global technology consultancy that designs, develops and supports unique software solutions, helping clients take their businesses forward. Recognized for their deep domain expertise and superior technical talent, DataArt teams create new products and modernize complex legacy systems that affect technology transformation in select industries.

 DataArt has earned the trust of some of the world’s leading brands and most discerning clients, including Nasdaq, S&P, Travelport, Ocado, artnet, Betfair, and Apple Leisure Group among others. Organized as a global network of technology services firms, DataArt brings together expertise of over 2,500 professionals in 20 locations in the US, Europe, and Latin America.

 About the 1000 Companies to Inspire Britain report:

 About the London Stock Exchange Group

 London Stock Exchange Group (LSE.L) is a diversified international market infrastructure and capital markets business sitting at the heart of the world’s financial community. The Group can trace its history back to 1698.

 The Group operates a broad range of international equity, bond and derivatives markets, including London Stock Exchange; Borsa Italiana; MTS, Europe’s leading fixed income market; and Turquoise, a pan-European equities MTF. It is also home to one of the world’s leading growth markets for SMEs, AIM. Through its platforms, the Group offers international business and investors unrivalled access to Europe’s capital markets.

 London Stock Exchange Group is a leading developer of high performance trading platforms and capital markets software for customers around the world. In addition to the Group’s own markets, over 35 other organisations and exchanges use the Group’s MillenniumIT trading, surveillance and post trade technology.

 Headquartered in London, with significant operations in North America, Italy, France and Sri Lanka, the Group employs approximately 4,700 people.


