Data Security Guidance for Small Businesses

April 5, 2017

If you are a small business and you find that you are not regulated, then you probably don’t get much guidance when it comes to data security. However, you still have a big responsibility, especially if you handle customer data. Cyber attacks have been all over the headlines for some time, and while it may be the big companies that are hitting the news, there are a lot of smaller businesses that are also being targeted.

 As a business owner, it is important that you are doing all that you can to protect your data. From backing up data in case it is accidentally lost, to installing security features on your business website.

 Here are a few pointers for any business that is looking to strengthen its data security processes:

 Set up internal policies – If you have a team of employees, then you need to make sure that they are competent in preventing data security breaches. By setting up policies for your employees to follow and arranging training for them, you will be able to reduce the risk of breaches. You can get guidance on the government website, and make sure to download the guide to ensure that you are covering everything listed in the brochure or guide.

 IT Security – If you don’t have a specialist IT team within your business, then you might want to employ a contractor to review your IT security. Companies like Ottawa network management will be able to help you to make your systems and infrastructure more secure. From setting up firewalls, arranging encryption tools and installing antivirus software, there are a number of measures that you can take to keep your data more secure.

 Don’t share passwords – Passwords should never be shared, even with colleagues, and they should never be written down anywhere. Always use strong passwords, incorporating capital letters and numbers, to make it harder for cyber criminals to hack into your files.

 Internet access – One of the ways that cybercriminals can hack into a business’ data is because an employee has gone onto the internet to browse an untrusted website. Firewalls can prevent access to such sites, but if you don’t have these precautions setup, then you need to trust that your employees won’t be trying to get onto these websites.

 They may not understand the risks associated with their actions, and believe there is no harm viewing the footage of a sports match during their lunch break. However, illegal streaming sites are notorious for being bugged and hackers can easily make their way into your computer if you ever land on one of these untrusted sites.

 Secure premises – Data can also be stolen from a break I,n or someone masquerading as someone who is entitled to be on the premises. In some instances, companies have been caught out by people claiming to be from an IT company, wanting to update their systems. Instead, they have downloaded data onto a flash drive. You have to be very careful about who enters your premises and that any paper documents are securely locked away.

 More details here 


