Ten Tokens to Watch – July / August

July 14, 2018

This article is not financial advice, and buyers of these tokens do so at their own risk.

 The token market continues to be an area of huge innovation. This is the latest analysis by research firm Novum Insights of the token market.

 CASPER API

 Casper API is a revolution in data storage on the blockchain. Most of the projects in the ICO industry have a fundamental business model of helping users to earn tokens when users offer a good, a service, or a digital entity in exchange of tokens. Casper API solves the most fundamental problem of data storage of Blockchain by allowing users to rent their extra disk spaces in exchanges for CST tokens. The data will be split across the nodes which makes it almost impossible to hack. The project will allow communities to store Dapps and their data, but it also allows users to store pictures, videos, music, and other types of files. The project is built on Ethereum and sees its future when the data produced and used in technologies like IoT, AI, AR/VR, self-driving cars etc. will be shared and the demand of data storage services will soar, Casper API with its users will be available in the market at very cheap rates with faster file transfer speed. CST is an ERC 20 token which can also be traded on exchanges.

 The company has set up its soft cap at $6.7m and the hard cap at $26.2m. The team is situated in Russia with a strong base of advisors to guide the project in cloud storage, decentralised markets, and cryptocurrency industry. The project will be competing with Amazon in future but it will probably become one of the most successful projects in the industry of decentralised companies.

 ETHEAL

 Etheal is a blockchain platform that intends to offer healthcare solutions to the world. Intrinsically, it is a Booking.com, Salesforce, and Steemit of healthcare.

 The company aims to provide healthcare solutions everywhere around the world, and the patients can pay for the services with the company’s tokens, which will be traded using smart contracts. A dynamic network of medical institutions will be developed globally where the patients will have a single currency to receive medical treatments all around the world. The core values of their platform are to provide digitisation, transparency, cheaper service, data sharing, and automation to the healthcare industry. Currently, the project is running in Hungary and Brazil. The company aims to expand this project to 30 countries. The project will operate in its already built platform, Dorklist. With the help of Dorklist and their Heal tokens, the platform will develop a network where doctors can also interact with each other. This social media platform of medical experts can boost innovations and find cures to various diseases on this planet. This social media platform is going to be especially useful for the remote areas where the medical facilities are very hard to reach. The team has ample experience in healthcare and medical tourism. The company may face regulatory risks since such kind of a global platform has to comply with different geographies. The social media presence of Etheal is excellent and can gain a substantial market share from the date of its initial release, and the project can open new dimensions in the healthcare industry.

 FTEC

 FTEC is one of the hottest ICOs now with a very strong social media presence. The main reason for this is the idea itself where an ecosystem of AI and neural networks is developed to conduct effective trading activities on the cryptocurrency markets. Cryptocurrency markets are full of unprofessional traders, and often the trader orders placed on various exchanges turn out to be fake. Experience of traders also varies from novices to trading experts. FTEC wants to build a trading platform which is compatible with all levels of experience with tools based on AI and neural networks algorithms. Automated trading with bots is already in the exchanges now and will be very prevalent in the future. The company already has an existing trading bot called as coinbot.club to showcase the model to its users. One of the best qualitative attributes of FTEC is the transparency and elaboration it has shown in its documentations. The project is very clearly explained to the investors, and this is another reason FTEC has a large investor base and following.

 FTEC has built an Adaptive Social Assistant (a bot) which can provide all the information, news, posts from blogs, and social media data from the cryptocurrency world. The platform will also analyse the trading behaviours of the traders, and provide recommendations. With all this, the company has to deal with regulatory risks, business risks, security risks, and technical risks with respect to personal data. It is the UK company with a very experienced team in crypto trading and AI. The project has a huge potential with a vision to implement a future of AI in crypto-trading.

 VERNAM

 The size of the insurance industry is gigantic and Vernam is targeting it with the use of Blockchain solutions with a 0% commission fee. Their platform will run a decentralised network of customers, brokers, and insurance companies on blockchain to digitise the insurance processes and make them cheaper, fast, transparent, immutable, and convenient. This also means that the duties of a broker, which is charging a heavy commission from the insurance companies, will also reduce as well as the cost of middlemen. Vernam has a very powerful team of blockchain experts, developers, financial experts, legal counselors, who have a very strong academic background, and industry experience.

 The company has a team of outstanding advisors with some celebrated names of the cryptocurrency industry.

 The non-life insurances is a huge market in Europe with a density of €760 for 2015. Vernam Token (VRN) is an ERC 20 token which will power Vernam’s platform. The token will be responsible for all kinds of transactions between the participants of the Vernam’s network and can also be traded on exchanges. The use of VRN tokens is not a necessary requirement to purchase digital insurances as the tokens will be converted from other methods of payments. The soft cap of the project is set at $2m and the hard cap is set at $42m. A project like this definitely needs ample funding to develop the platform and boost its presence in the markets. The market size is very impressive, and the crew members can sail the ship very efficiently with its onboard participants through the platform they are building.

 ETERNAL TRUSTS

 Eternal Trusts is a Singapore based startup which targets the fiduciary industry. They are developing a blockchain platform which will allow users to buy deferred purchases of future technologies which are not currently accessible. The future technologies they target are mostly the biomedical advancements such as cryogenical freezing, cloning, storing stem cells and DNAs, some of them are not even invented yet. Eternal Trusts is developing a platform which uses AI and smart contracts to perform the future transactions of requests and purchases towards these technologies once they become available and legal.

 The contracts signed with the Eternal Trusts will be called Trusts, and will be stored in the blockchain so that they can’t be altered and hacked during the waiting period. Trusts are like assets which will provide massive future value to the millionaires who are investing. The steps in the roadmap consist of crowdfunding events, DAO development, Distributed Oracles System development with the integration of AI, and R&D initiatives. All the fees of legal agreements, purchases, or any kind of transactions involved with the project can be completed only with the use of ETT tokens. ET token is an ERC 20 token since the project is built on the Ethereum platform. The company has set its soft cap at $7 million and the hard cap will be decided after the pre-sale which has a cap at $2m. The project is based in Singapore but the team members are mostly from Russia. The only downside of the project is that they target exclusively high net worth individuals, and their website clearly states it.

 ICON

 ICON, also called a South Korean Ethereum, is seeking to ‘hyperconnect the world’ by building its own blockchain platform which will allow both private and public blockchains to interact while maintaining their unique properties like consensus mechanism, incentive systems etc. The blockchain is already used by various banks, conglomerates, other financial institutions, decentralised communities, and governments. The consensus protocol which ICON’s blockchain follows is called Loop Fault Tolerance (LFT) which is a modified version of Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT). ICON is a part of Blockchain Interoperability Alliance with Wanchain and Aion. ICON has a team of 46 members with remarkable experience in AI, blockchain development, and design security.

 The token powering the blockchain is called as ICX. It is used as a bridge currency to execute transactions between different currencies, pay for transaction fees, and as a medium for exchange for the DApps developed on the ICON platform. The company is moving towards forming great partnerships with Samsung, Line, and Hyundai. The price of the ICX dropped to 1/10th of its value since the January crash. The All-in-one blockchain has a huge technological potential, strong backing of the team as well as the partners, and widespread adaptation by the Dapp developers who want to introduce new projects in the variety of industries.

 LISK

 Platforms which enable developers to build projects on their architecture have been one of the most intriguing cryptocurrencies to long-term investors.

 Lisk allows developers to deploy their side chains, which are linked to the main Lisk blockchain, and develop their custom tokens for their business purposes. The involvement of sidechains provides unlimited flexibility to the blockchain applications and the tokens developed on Lisk. The stand-out point for Lisk is that it has taken the pros of private and public blockchains by introducing sidechains into their ecosystem with a customisable code in both back-end as well as front-end. Lisk provides advanced developer tools with a very detailed documentation to provide ample ease for developers to build their businesses. The CEO of Lisk is the Ex-CEO of Ethereum.

 Lisk is also partnering with Microsoft for 2 years to play a part in Microsoft’s Blockchain-as-a-service platform Azure. This was one of the reasons why Lisk has a very successful ICO with a very strong investor base currently. The platform is very scalable, which gives developers another reason to choose it to set up their businesses. The crash of crypto in January wiped out 50% of the market capitalisation from the cryptocurrency markets, and even then Lisk managed to keep its cool. Various investors noticed this stability of the LSK token and captivated them to trade them more. Lisk has tremendous potential as a platform and a very bright future as a cryptocurrency. Even now, being in the market since 2016, it still has prospects of touching bright skies and attracting more investors for longer terms during its flights.

 VECHAIN

 VeChain was founded in 2015, and is one of the oldest cryptocurrencies in the market. Although VeChain gained momentum late; wine, agricultural, and luxury goods industry were already making use of its blockchain solutions. The platform was originally developed for the supply chain industry, but with time the diversity of its applications have increased in various industries. These industries include Automobile, Tobacco, Financial, Data management, and Renewable Energy. The team is based in Singapore with a strong backing of tech companies. One of the most attractive features of VeChain is its healthy partnerships. Its list of partners includes PWC, Chinese Government, China Unicorn, Babyghost, Hyperledger, Microsoft, Renault, BMW, Kuehne & Nagel and many more. Although VeChain is facing challenges in penetrating the Chinese Market due to the ban on cryptocurrencies; with its monumental partnerships and diverse services, it still has the potential to grow.

 If China considers lifting its ban on cryptocurrencies, VeChain will have a treasure of gold right next to its doors. Even if China doesn’t lift the ban, VeChain has its offices located in Singapore, France, and Hong Kong, where it sees other huge markets to expand. The launch of VeChain Thor Mainnet will transform its platform into a full-fledged, application-filled, enterprise-level public platform. The current VEN token will convert to VET token and the consensus mechanism will also change to proof-of-authority to ensure the developments on its platform aligns with the principles of VeChain foundation. VeChain faces competition with other blockchain platforms such as Stratis, Request network, and most predominantly NEO. The company has immense possibilities to grow, and the potential to become one of the most successful platforms available for corporations.

 WAVES

 Waves is a proof-of-stake blockchain and the cryptocurrency that fuels this blockchain which is designed for large-scale businesses and customer adoption. The primary objective of the company is to make the boons of blockchain technology available to all size of businesses and end users. The users and developers can their businesses and cryptocurrencies on Waves platform with decentralised trading and integrated fiat currency gateways to convert the cryptocurrencies to other cryptos or national currencies. These activities are possible on Waves decentralised exchange which is working on Waves blockchain platform and falls in the list of top cryptocurrency decentralised exchanges currently.

 The decentralised exchanges are the future of cryptocurrency trading due to their transparency, immutability, and being very less endangered to hack. Waves blockchain platform provides facilities for non-Turing smart contracts and will be introducing Turing complete smart contracts by the end of 2018. This will give an upper hand to Waves platform over Ethereum which contains only Turing complete smart contracts. The team is based in Russia and many of their senior members have previously worked with NXT project. The company has partnerships with Deloitte and Russian National Settlement Depository. Waves face its competition from Ethereum, NEO, Stratis, NXT, and LISK but what sets them apart is the fact that token development on Waves is ridiculously easy. 16000 tokens have already been issued on this platform which will continue to grow rapidly in future.

 ONTOLOGY

 Ontology is a philosophical study of the nature of being, becoming, relations, and reality.

 Ontology is an attempt to provide a comprehensive incorporated system of existential blockchains. Ontology network is a distributed trust system built with the help of multiple blockchains which is crosschain, cross-industry, cross-application, and cross-system. This definition itself elaborates the unlimited flexibility it offers as a network and as a platform. The platform which forms a matrix of blockchain with both public and private blockchains which ensures data security, encrypted data analysis, and numerous hardware options. The entire project is built keeping ‘Trust’ as the core principle of development by integrating multiple trust protocols of various blockchain networks and databases. The infrastructure of the network is constructed by merging distributed exchanges, distributed identity systems, distributed procedure protocols, distributed data sharing, distributed attestations, distributed communities, and various other technical modules. The blockchain follows a unique consensus protocol called as Verifiable Byzantine Fault Tolerance (VBFT) which ensures speed and security. The flexibility the network provides is splendid covering almost every current and future sectors of the economy.

 The team is based in China and has previously had great success with NEO. The project is still in its early days, but even being located within the strictest cryptocurrency regulated areas, it has an immense potential to grow globally. The coin is already trading in Asia’s biggest exchanges such as Binance and Kucoin with impressive trading volumes and is an eye-catching opportunity for investors who want to invest in early stage stable projects.

 

 For more tokens to watch, check out last’s months Ten Tokens to Watch – June.

 DISCLAIMER: THE ABOVE REFERENCES AN OPINION, AND IS FOR INFORMATION PURPOSES ONLY. IT IS NOT INTENDED TO BE INVESTMENT ADVICE.


