The French Tech Hub

April 14, 2016

London’s French Tech community is announcing the launch of the French Tech Hub London on Thursday 14 April at 6.00 p.m., in the presence of Emmanuel Macron, French Minister of the Economy, Industry and the Digital Sector and Axelle Lemaire, Minister of State for the Digital Sector.

 For some years now, the French Tech ecosystem has seen rapid growth, driven by a new generation of entrepreneurs, investors, engineers, designers and other talented people.  France is becoming a “start-up nation”, home to vibrant tech hubs and talent and imbued with a strong entrepreneurial culture.  The name of this movement is “La French Tech”; it is led by entrepreneurs and backed by the French government.

 The French Tech Hub programme consists of a worldwide network of tech entrepreneurs, investors and executives. These 11 (soon to be 20) French Tech communities are designed to build bridges between major innovation hubs and facilitate the international growth of French start-ups.

 London is the first European capital to be labelled as a French Tech Hub, coordinated by Albin Serviant, CEO of Easyroommate.com and Appartager.com, and under the patronage of Bernard Liautaud, Patron of the Hub, General Partner at Balderton Capital, founder of Business Objects. 

 To date, London’s French Tech community includes the following members under the French Tech London label: French Digital, FrogValley, FrenchConnect London, Business France, the French Chamber of Commerce in Great Britain and the French Embassy. 

 Devialet will power the sound system and showcase its technology with their last product, PHANTOM, a 100% wireless speaker integrating the ADH® intelligence , while OVH will present its latest Digital Launch Pad start-up accelerator programme.

 The six members of the panel listed above will be available to meet the press before the launch of the French hub, from 5.30 p.m. onwards, as well as Bernard Liautaud (Patron of the Hub, General Partner at Balderton Capital, founder of Business Objects), Pascal Cagni (Founding partner, C4 Ventures) Albin Serviant (coordinator of the French Tech Hub London, CEO of Easyroommate.com and Appartager.com) and Hiren Parekh (Sales and Marketing Director, OVH UK).

 Emmanuel Macron will say a few words to the press at a short and very informal Q&A opportunity when he leaves the event at around 8.00 p.m.

 Axelle Lemaire will also be available to discuss digital issues, for example developments in the French legal framework.

 To get accredited to the event please email: rsvp.londres-amba@diplomatie.gouv.fr

 In addition, to register your interest to speak to the French Tech entrepreneurs, Emmanuel Macron and/or Axelle Lemaire as mentioned above, please contact: stephanie.le-henaff@diplomatie.gouv.fr


