Barclays Eagle Lab will Help Isle of Man Businesses Soar to New Heights

April 4, 2018

Barclays Eagle Labs are a community resource that offer a range of resources including co-working space, expert mentoring, training workshops, a fully-equipped ‘MakerSpace’ to support rapid prototype development, and private office space for scale up businesses.

 Located in Queen Victoria House on Victoria Street in Douglas and opening in June 2018, the Isle of Man Eagle Lab will offer 5,000 square feet of collaborative working space and will be available for use by individuals, local businesses, community groups and schools. The new Lab builds on the bank’s successful network of 15 Eagle Labs already operating in the UK.

 Simon Scott, country head for Barclays in the Isle of Man, said:

 “At Barclays our long-term aim is to create and curate a series of products, services and partnerships that improve the lives of people in the communities which we serve. Eagle Labs play a pivotal role by fostering innovation, driving local economic growth, developing digital empowerment in the local community and facilitating business success so I’m thrilled that Barclays is making this investment in the Isle of Man. The Eagle Lab concept originates in the UK, but has been made possible in the Isle of Man through our partnership with the Chamber of Commerce and Department for Enterprise.”

 Barclays, the Chamber of Commerce and the Department for Enterprise will work with entrepreneurs, business angels, education partners and local professionals to provide a mentoring and coaching network to facilitate the growth of the businesses involved in the Eagle Lab.

 Chris Allen, president of the Isle of Man Chamber of Commerce, said:

 “As a business network we aim to support business growth and opportunity and this extends to local entrepreneurs on island. The Eagle Lab provides an excellent vehicle for innovation and particularly will enhance the Isle of Man’s digital offering and help to underpin digital literacy and innovation for people of all ages.  The Chamber of Commerce is pleased to be working with Barclays and is excited to see opportunity for businesses to prosper locally.”

 Laurence Skelly MHK, Minister for Enterprise, commented:

 “The launch of the Eagle Lab will give local businesses access to low cost space and access to like-minded, proactive individuals. Both are essential for early stage, growth and accelerator businesses, bringing forth opportunities for collaboration and encouraging an environment that allows businesses to thrive and flourish. The new Eagle Lab is a prime example of positive private/public interaction, being the result of cross-working and investment from Barclays, the Isle of Man Chamber of Commerce and the Department for Enterprise. The Lab is a much needed business service and will provide a vibrant and well-connected community space for our Island.”

 About Barclays Eagle Labs

 Barclays Eagle Labs are spaces set up by Barclays to help businesses create, innovate and grow. They also operate as community resources supporting digital empowerment for all. Their focus is to drive digital skills development, productivity and economic growth, and support job creation. There are now 15 locations across the UK where entrepreneurs can reside, access mentoring, funding and events. Eagle Labs facilitate and deliver learning and activities such as coding, 3D printing and “maker” facilities and rapid product prototyping, hackathons, as well as offering business incubation, mentoring and co-working and office space for ambitious businesses. Since the opening of the first lab, over 100,000 individuals have used the service, ranging from ‘makers’, entrepreneurs and fast-growing businesses, children learning to code, and large corporates.


