Caspian Partners with Octagon, Asia’s Largest Over-The-Counter Crypto Fund

June 18, 2018

Caspian, the full-stack crypto trading, portfolio and risk management platform for institutional and sophisticated investors, has announced a significant partnership with Octagon Strategy Limited (OSL), Asia’s largest digital asset brokerage who has deployed Caspian’s full suite of crypto trading tools, including an innovative portfolio management system to meet increasing demand for crypto trading from institutional investors.

 OSL is the an OTC digital asset brokerage in Asia-Pacific and manages the buying and selling of all major cryptocurrencies with clients in more than 50 countries worldwide, including financial institutions, family offices and high net worth individuals. Octagon has become recognised as the “Go To” institutional cryptocurrency brokerage in Asia with transaction volumes topping US$1.5 Billion in December 2017.

 Founder and Managing Director of Octagon Strategy Limited, Dave Chapman said: “We are seeing ever-increasing inflows of institutional funds, both into OSL specifically and the cryptocurrency market in general. Caspian’s professional-grade trade order, execution, compliance and risk management features that enable us to meet investors’ regulatory and operational needs is a much welcomed necessity in this space.”

 Caspian is a solution that addresses the needs of sophisticated traders and asset managers by offering a full suite covering the life cycle of the trade. The system enables investors to track performance, stay within their compliance limits, and understand their risk and exposure. The unified trading module enables trading across multiple exchanges and utiliise algorithms to reduce slippage and improve performance.

 “Our aim at Caspian is to drive exponential growth in crypto-trading participation amongst institutional and sophisticated investors. This new partnership with OSL will help us to not only increase our user base but demonstrates the platform’s ongoing drive for connectivity and operability across crypto-markets,” said Robert Dykes, CEO of Caspian.


