SwiftScale unveils eight scaleups shaping the future of business

May 18, 2018

SwiftScale has launched its Spring ’18 programme in collaboration with Macquarie Group, the global investment banking and diversified financial services group.

 Over 100 decision makers and influencers from FTSE 100 and Fortune Global 500 companies assembled at Schroders’ London headquarters to hear eight fast-growth startups present innovative solutions to various common business problems.

 Throughout the programme, Amplyfi, APEXX, Freeformers, Libryo, LivingLens, Panaseer, Qlearsite and Tessian will leverage SwiftScale’s extensive executive network to establish business relationships, create new commercial opportunities and gain insight into large enterprise clients.

 Alexander Sainty, CEO, SwiftScale said: “Getting access to decision makers within large organisations is extremely time-consuming. This programme is a rare opportunity for founders to capitalise on a ready-made enterprise network without getting too distracted from running their businesses.”

 By bringing together forward-thinking business leaders and fast-growth B2B startups, SwiftScale promotes business efficiency through collaborative innovation.

 Participation in the SwiftScale programme is by invitation or referral only. SwiftScale scaleups are best-in-class, revenue-generating with large enterprise clients and the resources and ambition to scale. SwiftScale executives are typically decision-makers or gatekeepers FTSE 100 & Fortune Global 500 companies.

 SwiftScale Spring ‘18 cohort:

 Amplyfi — revolutionises business intelligence and strategic decision making by enabling organisations to unlock the entire surface and deep web and uncover emerging opportunities and threats.

 APEXX — optimises the cost of complex merchants’ payment ecosystems by providing a gateway that consolidates global payment providers into a single integration point.

 Freeformers  —  enables businesses to deliver their commercial strategies and drive revenue growth through designing and delivering cutting-edge & engaging learning programmes for their workforces.

 Libryo — empowers organisations and their employees to know their legal and regulatory obligations in any situation.

 LivingLens — unlocks the power of video for brands, agencies and technology providers, transforming video content into a usable data asset enabling fast insight generation and powerful storytelling.

 Panaseer—  automatically consumes and analyses data from security, IT and business solutions, to provide complete and accurate visibility into an organisation’s assets, controls, vulnerabilities and threats, from enterprise-level down to individual devices.

 Qlearsite — is a workforce analytics platform helping businesses to make smart, informed decisions about their people.

 Tessian — is a next-generation email security platform which uses machine intelligence to automatically prevent highly sensitive emails being sent to the wrong people with minimal end user disruption.

 About SwiftScale

 SwiftScale facilitates effective corporate-startup collaboration. Through exclusive fixed-term programmes, it connects startups that are ready for market with corporates ready to do business. Its alumni have raised over $100m, launched over 100 pilots / PoCs, established channel partnerships, recruited board members, entered new markets and refined sales processes.


