fscom Appoints Alex Lee as Non-Executive Chairman

April 7, 2017

fscom announced the appointment of former Ernst & Young partner, Alex Lee, as Non-Executive Chairman.

 With over 25 years’ experience in the global Financial Services industry, Mr. Lee will be responsible for providing strategic oversight and governance to ensure fscom continues its strong growth trajectory and achieves its goal of becoming one of the UK and Ireland’s leading Financial Services compliance advisory firms. 

 Since leaving Ernst & Young in 2013, where he headed the Strategy Practice for the UK and Ireland in the Financial Services Advisory business, Mr. Lee has become a prominent figure in the UK’s Fintech scene. In addition to being a mentor at two of Europe’s leading Start Up accelerators, NDRC in Dublin and StartUpBootCamp in London, he holds a number of Non-Executive positions with fast growing FinTech and WealthTech start-ups across London, Dublin and Belfast.

 Jamie Cooke, Managing Director of fscom, comments, ‘Alex brings a wealth of financial services experience and a unique strategic insight into the FinTech industry, that will prove invaluable in helping us transition from a founder led business to an executive led professional services firm.”

 ‘The FinTech industry is flourishing, but ever more complicated regulatory pressures make it a very challenging environment, and the penalties for non-compliance for early stage companies can be terminal. fscom’s ability to provide expert advice to this fast growing sector of the market, while keeping in mind their commercial pressures, sets them apart from other compliance firms. I’m excited to be involved with such a dynamic company that adds genuine value by offering deep domain expertise and working in partnership with its customers,’ adds Lee.

 fscom

 Set up in 2011, fscom is an award-winning boutique consultancy that provides compliance solutions to financial services institutions. Our compliance services span advice, assurance and RegTech solutions. We take a commercial approach to help our clients grow their business in a compliant way. We work in partnership with our clients and go the extra mile to understand their needs. Our people have deep domain knowledge and technical expertise but also personality. Operating from our UK service delivery centre in Belfast, we are able to offer onsite specialist expertise without London based fees.


