FinovateEurope 2018: Data In Focus

April 25, 2018

This year FinovateEurope attracted 1400+ senior financial and banking executives, venture capitalists, press, industry analysts, bloggers, regulators, and entrepreneurs from across the UK and EU. 1400+ attendees. 70+ companies demoing. 120+ expert speakers. These are the FinovateEurope’s core figures.

 Finovate’s demoing companies came from a wide variety of fintech sub-sections. Here’s a few of the topics that were covered within the conference: Cryptocurrency/ blockchain; AI; Investing/wealth management; Lending; Payments; UX; Core banking; Identity/KYC; Big data.

 On a final note FinovateEurope Best of Show winners were announced. If there is one theme that unites all of the winners this year, that theme may be summed up in one word: data.

 As Finovate senior research analyst Julie Muhn pointed out during a recent conversation, the ability to leverage data to create more meaningful, more personalized, more secure experiences for consumers of financial services underlies much of the innovation that we see not just on the Finovate stage, but across fintech writ large, as well.

 With this in mind, FinovateEurope 2018 presented a small sample of those companies that may be best positioned to take advantage of this Golden Age of Data: the Best of Show winners of FinovateEurope 2018.

 Backbase for its Customer OS, the next generation of the Backbase Digital Banking Platform, which is laserfocused on providing customer-first journeys.

 Be-IQ for its holistic and gamified approach to risk profiling and financial well-being that accounts for the very contradictions that make us human: our behaviors.

 CREALOGIX for its customer banking platform, Gravity, which is breaking new ground with its intuitive and user-friendly, self-service insights application.

 iProov for its liveness-protected, facial biometric authentication technology which is fully-automated for fast, easy and ultra-secure mobile and PC on-boarding.

 Meniga for its digital banking solution that helps banks around the world use data to personalize digital channels and drive customer engagement.

 Microblink for BlinkReceipt, its SDK for real-time extraction of all purchase data from retail receipts and OCR technology which eliminates typing from mobile apps.

 W.UP for its digital banking sales and engagement solution that uses pre-built customer insights to build relevant, personalized, and timely interactions with clients.


