Starling Hackathon Opens Door on Open Banking

March 15, 2017

Starling Bank announced it is to host its first hackathon, opening up its API to outside developers for the first time. The hackathon makes Starling the first UK licenced bank to launch a public API in keeping with the ambitions of PSD2 and the Open Banking initiative.

 Starling’s public API enables third-parties to access customer data (with their permission, of course) and build on top of the Starling Platform to create products and services such as chatbots, spending analytics, or connections with the Internet of Things.

 The open API also underpins Starling’s Marketplace model, which is set to launch in March 2017.

 The Marketplace is a platform embedded in the Starling app. Allowing the bank to partner with and offer customer’s frictionless access to a range of financial products such as mortgages and loans, all from within the app. This is also intended to give customers the greatest amount of choice in provider – so they’re not just limited to traditional rates and products but options from innovative new fintechs and startups too. In the future, it could also extend to include integrations with lifestyle, retail and wellness products.

 Hackathon participants will gain early access to the developer platform and the Marketplace, along with the necessary credentials to access and start using the Starling API.

 Taking place at Google Campus in London in April (7th – 9th), the Starling Hackathon gives participants the chance to work with the Starling API’s read and write capabilities.  It also means they will be the first developers to use real UK customer transactional data, rather than just personal or bank data.

  

 For more information, or to arrange for any further quotes or interviews please contact Harriet Allner, Communications Manager at Starling Bank (Email: harriet.allner@starlingbank.com)

 Further details of the Hackathon can be found online at www.starlingbank.com/hackathon

 Alternatively, if you have any further questions about attending or entering the hackathon, don’t hesitate to reach out via email developer@starlingbank.com.

 About Starling Bank

 Launching very soon (Q1 2017), Starling Bank is creating an app that will replace the current account for a generation of mobile users, helping them to see their money from a new perspective. A fintech business with a banking license, Starling is customer-first and mobile-focused, designed for those people who live their lives on their mobile and would like to be able to manage their money there too. Unlike other next generation banks, we are not replicating the traditional bank model. We are not providing a range of products. Instead, Starling gives its customers access to a mobile marketplace of services and products that best meet their money needs at any given time.

  

  


