Job Initiative To Develop Fintech Centre In Central Ireland

January 25, 2018

First Data, the global tech company that enables commerce for some of the largest and most innovative companies in the world, has selected Ireland for their new global research and development centre.

 The new innovations centre in Nenagh, Co Tipperary, which will open its doors in March 2018, is now recruiting top talent from around the world to build the next generation of commerce infrastructure and services.

 Recognising Ireland as a significant hub for global technology talent, First Data aims to hire 150 staff in a variety of high calibre technical roles over the next 12 months. Building on the local and international reputation for attracting talent to this area of Ireland was a deciding factor for the Fintech giant headquartered in the United States.

 “The work we will be doing in Tipperary is not only critical to the future success of First Data; it will shape the future of international payments technology, which is crucial for global business” said Dr. Christopher Mascaro, Head of Research & Development at First Data. “The Nenagh centre in Ireland is looking to make contact with people focused on developing digital innovations with Augmented Intelligence solutions, creating intelligent infrastructures and forging the next generation of commerce platforms” he added.

 Given First Data’s unique position at the nexus of commerce and technology, First Data employees have significant opportunities to either launch or enhance their careers across two fast-growing industries.  These are high-impact roles that will address the leading edge of engineering and data science needs for the company.

 First Data have set themselves the task of hiring with gusto and want to hire key roles immediately, such as: Software Engineers, Big Data Engineers, Data Scientists and Product experts. Roles on offer range from Junior to Senior levels.

 At First Data, employees are known as “owner-associates” as all of them are shareholders. This means that not only will employees make an impact on the overall company; they also own a piece of it.

 Commenting on why First Data chose Tipperary as a location for its R&D centre, Christopher Mascaro said “As the population in Dublin continues to rapidly grow, the Nenagh location provides a more affordable, less congested option for technology talent who want to avoid the long daily commute. Nenagh gives people another option and sets First Data apart from the major technology companies based in Dublin.”

 


