Exscudo And Crypto.Tickets Exclusive Partnership Opens A New Market For Cryptocurrency

October 5, 2017

We are proud to announce that Exscudo, the financial ecosystem which unites cryptocurrency markets and traditional finance, and Crypto.Tickets, project to establish a universal decentralized platform for selling tickets have entered into an exclusive partnership agreement.

 The Crypto.Tickets platform will be launched on EON blockchain, which will help them to solve the issues of accepting fiat and cryptocurrency payments and their mutual conversion. For Exscudo, in turn, this collaboration is a possibility to integrate a new market into the global cryptocurrency system.

 Earlier Exscudo and Crypto.Tickets have signed a letter of intent in the field of development and agreed to launch the Crypto.Ticket platform on the EON blockchain basis. Now the collaboration has the status of exclusive partnership, implying exclusive development and integration with the Exscudo ecosystem. It means that within the time period defined by agreement direct competitors of Ticket Cloud and Crypto.Tickets project will not be launched on EON blockchain.

 Crypto.Tickets is a project creating a unique blockchain ecosystem which will forever change ticket sales for the mass event industry. Its mission is to establish a new standard for the ticket industry – without speculations on the secondary market, fraud, forgery and incomplete ticket realisation. Blockchain technology disposes of these problems forever, making the relations of market participants simple and transparent. Crypto.Tickets ICO campaign starts on October, 5.

 “I am very pleased to announce the beginning of cooperation between Exscudo and Crypto.Tickets. The decision about collaboration with Crypto.Tickets was made because these guys are truly professionals in their field, they have work experience in the ticket industry (their product has been available since 2014); besides, they are striving to create a high quality product, and not just to raise money like the majority of startups”, says Andrew Zimine, CEO and founder of Exscudo.

 Within the frameworks of the exclusive partnership agreement both teams’ developers will cooperate closely to consider all the nuances of the ticket market’s business processes in the architecture of the platform by adding the needed functionality to the core of the system. Therefore, the full potential of EON platform will be realized.

 About Exscudo
Exscudo is the nextgen financial ecosystem that unites the traditional financial system and the cryptocurrency market. The main goal of the project is to create a single gate to cryptocurrency market for everyday users, professional traders, investors and financial institutions. Exscudo’s ecosystem consists of a Stock exchange, a b2b cryptocurrency merchant, mobile wallets, trading terminals, bank cards and a protected messenger. The developers team consists of professionals who have many years of experience in the development of financial products and services. More information about the team can be found on the Exscudo website.

 Inna Goncharova, PR Director Exscudo https://exscudo.com/


