Accenture and BTL Discuss the Challenges and Benefits of Blockchain Technology – Join the Webinar

April 11, 2018

On Thursday 12th April representatives from Accenture and BTL Group (www.btl.co & www.interbit.io) will partake in a webinar to discuss the benefits of blockchain technology for enterprise and the challenges it faces.

 To sign up and watch this free webinar click this link below, where you can also find out more information about the discussions that will take place:

 http://www.workcast.com/register?cpak=3139250558715965

 Can private blockchains scale?

 As enterprises around the world examine how to incorporate blockchain efficiencies into their business processes, some important questions are emerging. Can current blockchain structures handle the scale needed for widespread use? What about connectability? How far can blockchain’s impact reach?

 ABOUT BTL™ AND INTERBIT™

 Listed on the TSX Venture Exchange (TSX Venture:BTL) and operating from both Canada and the UK, BTL is an enterprise technology platform provider that is developing Interbit, a proprietary next generation blockchain platform. Via Interbit, BTL can help companies greatly reduce risks and costs by securely streamlining existing IT infrastructures. BTL has successfully demonstrated how Interbit can innovate and transform existing business processes for leading companies in the finance, energy and gaming sectors.

 Interbit is a fast, private, and scalable inter-connected blockchain platform. Via its suite of APIs and smart contracts, Interbit allows businesses around the world to improve efficiency in trading and operations, accelerate development of internal systems, and embrace new revenue generating opportunities, while providing the high levels of security, resilience and auditability required in regulated enterprise environments.

 With offices in Vancouver and Calgary, Canada and London, UK, BTL is positioning itself as a front-runner in the blockchain ecosystem, partnering with and enabling enterprises on Interbit in order to improve their existing IT systems.

 Website: www.btl.co

 Twitter: https://twitter.com/blockchainltd & https://twitter.com/interbit_

 Videos: https://youtu.be/YFOH0YEHLak and https://youtu.be/eWI-0AXaZgc


