The LHoFT Foundation and BCEE (Spuerkeess) to organize a Spanish Fintech Roadshow

November 25, 2017

The LHoFT Foundation and BCEE (Spuerkeess) with the support of the Spanish Institute for Foreign Trade (ICEX) enhance collaboration between Luxembourg and Spain by organizing a Spanish Fintech Roadshow.
Luxembourg, November 24th, 2017 – On Wednesday 22 November, the LHoFT Foundation and BCEE (Spuerkeess) with the support of the Spanish Institute for Foreign Trade (ICEX) organized a conference in the amazing venue of the “BCEE’s 19 Liberté building” showcasing eleven of Spain most interesting financial technology companies. The conference gathered more than 100 banking and financial services
executives.
The objective of this great gathering was to show that collaboration in the Fintech world is paramount. As highlighted in the welcome speeches made by H.E. Mr. Carlos de Lojendio, Spanish Ambassador, Jorge Alvar Villegas, ICEX Director, and Françoise Thoma, BCEE CEO, “Digitalization means working together in an unprecedented way to master the challenges of tomorrow”.
Françoise Thoma, CEO of BCEE added: “Entering the digital age creates an unprecedented opportunity for financial actors, regulators and training facilities to work together in order to develop the appropriate products and solutions. Luxembourg is the perfect place to make this happen.”
Before leaving the floor to the eleven vibrant Spanish Fintechs, representatives from Luxembourg for Finance, the Ministry of Economy, Luxinnovation, Expon Capital and the LHoFT summarized how connected and diverse the Luxembourg innovation ecosystem is. All that thanks to the unique collaboration between the private and the public stakeholders.
Alex Panican, Head of Partnerships and Ecosystem at the LHoFT Foundation commented: “The LHoFT is thrilled to have organize this Spanish Fintech Roadshow, with the great support of BCEE, the Luxembourg Spanish Embassy and the Spanish Institute for Foreign Trade (ICEX). Some local actors have already express great interest in some of the solutions and I am pretty sure the relation between
Luxembourg and Spain, on the fintech stage, will grow even stronger from now on. As always, we are very appreciative for the support and the commitment from the whole community in order to make this event a
success.”
Jorge Alvar Villegas, ICEX Director, mentioned: “We are delighted with the contacts Spanish companies made and the warm reception we received from our Luxembourgian hosts. We truly believe we can build bridges; many things are changing fast in both countries. It was our first event in Luxembourg but it will not be the last one.”

 Meet the 11 Spanish Fintechs
AVASCLOUD: Cloud Services Provider with offices in Barcelona, Miami and Buenos Aires, oriented to Managed Cybersecurity by means of SaaS CDN, custom Virtual Private Servers, DNS, VPN and e-Mail security products.
CANALYTICALS: Spanish Technological Company focusing on Big Data, Advanced Analytics and Machine Learning.
DOMINION DIGITAL: Global provider of multi-technology services and solutions and specialized engineering.

 FINANZAREL: Spanish invoice trading platform that offers SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises) the possibility to sell their receivables (outstanding invoices and pagares) to a pool of professional investors, in a fast, agile and reliable way.
INNOTEC SYSTEM: InnoTec is a as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Entelgy Grupo specialized in cybersecurity, intelligence and risk management.
BLUELIV: Scour the web, the dark web and deep internet to deliver real-time sophisticated intelligence bespoke to your organization.
LOGIC VALUE: Improve the financial decisions and processes of private investors, professional advisors and financial institutions.
ONE ESECURITY: Deliver effective solutions to the challenges you face today regarding regulation, privacy and operations with recent investigations focused on fraud detection and mitigation, insider trading and market manipulation and swift payment hijacking.
OPEN SISTEMAS: Specialized company in highly innovative services related to the management, transformation, analysis, storage and visualization of data in Big Data, Data Science and Cloud Integration, helping to enhance the strategic value of the information.
PAGAMASTARDE: Scalable technology platform to originate instant consumer credit, disrupting traditional business models.
HELPSYSTEMS: Develop powerful, easy-to-use software for cybersecurity, IT operations management and monitoring, business intelligence, and document management.

 About the LHoFT
The LHoFT Foundation is a public – private sector initiative that drives technology innovation for Luxembourg’s Financial Services industry, connecting the domestic and international FinTech community to develop solutions that shape the world of tomorrow. The other partners of the LHoFT initiative are Chamber of Commerce, the City of Luxembourg and the University of Luxembourg, and the initiative is supported by the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Economy and Ministry of State.
About BCEE – Spuerkeess
Founded in 1856, BCEE, the Luxembourg State and Savings Bank, is the doyen of the country’s financial institutions and one of the cornerstones of the financial community. BCEE’s assets are entirely owned by the Luxembourg State, making it the only major financial institution in the country without foreign shareholders. Today, BCEE is a full-fledged universal bank and offers the complete range of services that a national and international clientele can expect from its financial intermediary.
With some 1.800 employees, BCEE is one of the most important employers in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. It is a member of the European and World Savings Banks Organisation and also a founding member and principal shareholder of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. With 64 branches, of which 11 are finance centres, and 156 ATMs throughout the country, the Bank has the largest network in the Grand Duchy and also plays an important role in the industry and the SME sectors. Furthermore, it is the most important lender to local authorities. According to a recent poll, BCEE confirms its leadership in the domestic market with some 70% of the Luxembourg residents having a banking relationship with BCEE and some 50% considering BCEE as their main bank. BCEE’s position as the leader on the electronic banking market is confirmed with a continuous growth of the number of customers using its internet and mobile banking facilities S-net, S-net Mobile and S-Digicash.
With ratings of AA+ (stable outlook) by Standard & Poor’s and Aa2 (LT Deposit Rating – stable outlook) by Moody’s, BCEE remains the best-rated commercial bank in Luxembourg. To this day, BCEE also maintains very high solvency ratios – i.e. as at 31.12.2016 BCEE’s CET1 Capital Ratio was 17,7%. BCEE is one of the close to 130 systemic banking groups directly under the European Central Bank supervision.

 About ICEX
ICEX Spain Export and Investment is a Spanish Government public entity within the Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness whose mission is to promote the internationalization of Spanish companies and to attract foreign investments to Spain.


