PLEXAL: NEW WORLD CLASS TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION CENTRE

June 2, 2017

TO OPEN AT QUEEN ELIZABETH OLYMPIC PARK, LONDON, SUMMER 2017

 Tech startups, scaleups and corporate innovation teams to fill former Olympic Media Centre at Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, Stratford

 Plexal, the new International technology innovation destination will open its doors to over 800 members in London, June 2017.

 Located at Here East, the 1.2 million square-foot complex on the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in Stratford, London, Plexal has been designed by award winning architects, Grimshaw to create a mini city environment. Features will include an internal ‘high street’, ‘town square’, multi-media events space & spacious open & outdoor canal-side terrace to encourage business networking, inspiration & wellbeing.

 Due to open in June 2017, on the eve of London Tech Week, Plexal will offer unrivalled business services to startup & scaleup members including a maker’s lab for early prototyping, innovation & accelerator programmes, on-tap professional services such as legal, marketing & accountancy, industry-leading events, community events, coaching, mentorship & entrepreneurship training.

 Plexal will focus on driving & supporting collaboration between global corporations & Plexal startups – through its dedicated corporate innovation division.

 Collaboration and Partnership are at the heart of our business ethos; we source from local suppliers, support the graduating entrepreneurial talent from London’s colleges and universities, and integrate the creative sectors to support business and technology innovation.

 Led by CEO Claire Cockerton, whose team created Cognicity, a smart city technology pilot programme in London & Level39, the revolutionary fintech accelerator based in Canary Wharf, Plexal will become Europe’s largest connected business campus. The initial focus for the 68,000 square foot space will support the development of products in emerging technologies including wearables, IOT, smart cities, inclusive finance, sport, fashion and health.

 Claire Cockerton comments, “Plexal will become a truly unique innovation centre not only for London but the rest of the World.  Our mission is to become the beating heart of inventive enterprise; connected, intelligent & dynamic –  where people join forces, idea spark & new business is born. I believe we have created a first class space design to deliver this and look forward to telling the success stories of the new technology products & services that emerge from Plexal”.

 For more information,  visit http://www.plexal.com

 Notes 

  


