MTI Technology doubles size of its London facility in new expansion

April 1, 2018

One year on new management team pivots MTI toward the booming London finance sector.

 MTI Technology has doubled its footprint in Moorgate in the City of London, to better service the needs of its customers right in the heart of the financial sector in the UK. The expansion is the latest strategic investment made by the company following its acquisition by the Endless Fund IV from US-based private equity fund, Garnett and Helfrich Capital LLP in 2017.

 MTI opened its first location at 101 Finsbury Pavement – a large purpose-built office complex, which MTI shares with other finance and technology businesses including Equinix and Softcat in April 2017 as an integral part of the bold vision the management team has for the business.

 That management team is led by Scott Haddow, formerly of Trustmarque who installed as the CEO of MTI by its new private equity backers. He has been joined by Angelo Di Ventura, Chief Sales and Marketing Officer, and Ben Cranham, COO, both former members of the leadership team at TrustMarque.

 Scott Haddow, CEO, stated: “For over 25 years MTI Technology has carved out a reputation as a dependable transactional VAR firmly focused on the storage market for larger enterprises. My role, along with the senior management team, is to transform and grow the business across a broader portfolio, introduce new services and consultancy around our growing security offering, whilst remaining firmly focused on our core storage and data centre modernisation heritage. What we are seeing in the market today is that businesses are no longer looking for multiple providers but solutions based on an innate understanding of the data centre, infrastructure and the vital role security plays within it.”

 “This presents an exciting opportunity for us all at MTI Europe, our employees, customers and partners. MTI today is focussed, agile and decisive in its approach and I am looking forward to seeing the impact of our combined experience and insight as it is put to full effect, taking MTI to the next level. Our plans are ambitious and we will be making a series of announcements on our strategic direction over the next couple of months. So doubling our office space in Moorgate will send a clear message to the market that we are investing for the future and support our clients throughout the City,” he added.

 Headquartered in Godalming, Surrey and operating predominantly in the UK, Germany and France, MTI provides services including on-site and cloud-based storage, security solutions and infrastructure-as-a-service. MTI is an expert in these fields, delivering a complete lifecycle service incorporating all elements from design to installation through to ongoing support and maintenance services, and a full managed service offering.

 Chief Sales and Marketing Officer Angelo Di Ventura, MTI Technology, added, “Moorgate is at the heart of the FinTech world, between the smart technology boutiques around Old Street, and the big institutions around the Bank of England, there is nowhere better for us to support our customers in these sectors with secure data solutions.”

 With one of the most open, dynamic and innovative economies in the world, London provides access to the UK’s tremendous tech talent. This expansion keeps MTI on the pulse of an ever evolving industry and the company is better positioned than ever to continue delivering the service and expertise its customers have come to expect. MTI Technology was Endless’ eighth investment from its £525 million Fund IV.

 About MTI Technology
We work with over 1,800 customers from a range of industries around the world.

 Over the last 25 years, we’ve helped thousands of organisations to transform their IT, enabling them to reduce operating costs, increase profitability and mitigate risk. We employ proven methodologies and best practices and adopt a consultative approach to help our customers solve business challenges, providing secure, compliant management of their applications, data, infrastructure, and environment.

 Whether in a private, public, or hybrid cloud environment, we provide flexible, tailored contracts to meet capex, opex or utility-based requirements.

 We partner with our customers and take the time to understand their business, their challenges, their goals and aspirations. Our consultants work with you to provide support and guidance, helping you to ensure that the right strategic decisions and investments are made. Our pre- and post-sales service delivery is unrivalled, and it is for this reason that we manage to retain so many of our clients. It’s also why over 98% of the organisations that we work with would recommend us. For more information please see: https://mti.com/

  


