Qarasoft Launches KOSHO Beta Service, the World’s First AI Financial Forecasting Application

June 28, 2018

Qara Soft CEOs, Luke Byun and Katie Son, recently released their long awaited beta version Robo Advisor app, KOSHO. This is the world’s first ever app to utilise AI deep learning technology to forecast the next week’s global markets. Currently, the Korean version is available in South Korea and the English version is available in Singapore.

 KOSHO’s Market Dreamer, which is a Deep Learning technology used by Qara Soft, analyses more than 400 million global data in stocks, financial, and cryptocurrency markets, and provides predictions for the following week using company information, live market updates, and news reports. Users can select a category of their choice and interact with AI to predict if the market will rise or fall in the following week.

 Through this beta service, users can expect to see information from the Korea Composite Stock Price Index (KOSPI), New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), NASDAQ Stock Exchange, Singapore Exchange Limited (SGX), as well as more than 17,000 stock details from Japan, Taiwan, and Hong Kong. Lastly, the app covers forecasts of more than 22 major cryptocurrencies including Bitcoin and Ethereum.

 Users will automatically receive coins when they check the forecasts for stocks, financial, and cryptocurrency markets, and later use them for rewards. One of the rewards is a detailed global stock portfolio, which users can buy to see key insights about the following week’s markets. The portfolio is developed by fund managers that includes “Deep Learning Top 10 Stock Forecasts” and “Deep Learning Top 5 Cryptocurrency Forecasts.” Furthermore, users can buy gift coupons or coffee at the selected stores in the app.

 Kosho (こしょ, 古書) is a Japanese word that means “Ancient Book.” Books normally serve the purpose to equip and inform readers about a certain subject. Likewise, the app KOSHO analyses over 30 years of market history and informs its users with important data about the global markets. It serves to equip everyone with analytical skills to invest like a professional, and hopefully build the confidence to attract other investors.

 “I found that too often, individual investors with little to no experience have a difficult time understanding financial reports and other technical analysis. They also lack the patience and mentality to research and study the market on their own. So they end up investing out of a hunch or they hire expensive advisors,” said Katie Bomi Son, the Global CEO at Qara Soft. She added, “To resolve this issue, we’ve created a service that’s objective, quick, and cost-efficient. At the moment, users can only check the predictions for stocks, oil, gold, and financial and cryptocurrency rates. But in the future, our goal is to allow users to actually invest through the app.”

 

 


