Cif Joins Forces With Online Marketplace Helpling

October 10, 2017

London, 10 October 2017: Unilever’s cleaning brand, Cif, has today announced its partnership with Helpling, Europe’s leading online marketplace for household services, to free people’s time from their cleaning chores.

 On average, people spend two hours a day cleaning. Together with Helpling, Cif wants to give them this time back and make it easier than ever for people with busy lives to enjoy beautiful homes. Within a couple of taps on the Helpling app or clicks on the website, people can book a vetted and insured cleaning service provider and, at the same time, purchase Cif products to manage their household more conveniently.

 The partnership, starting with a pilot in London, follows Unilever’s investment into the home-cleaning platform and is supported by Unilever Foundry. The joint venture comes as part of Cif’s wider strategic plan to find new, innovative ways to help people cope with increasingly stressful and frenetic lives.

 Charlie Beevor, Vice President for Cif, commented: “In cities, such as London, people have extremely busy lifestyles that makes it hard to keep up with the household jobs. People are looking to technology to make their lives easier. By connecting people with trusted cleaners via the Helpling platform and our great CiF products, we free up their precious time to focus on what they enjoy most whilst keeping their homes beautiful to be enjoyed and lived in.”

 Benedikt Franke, Co-founder of Helpling, commented: “Today’s consumers have come to expect businesses to offer solutions that make their lives easier – already, consumers don’t have enough time and want to make the most of what they have. Partnering with Cif allows us to collaborate with a well-established brand to help ease the labour of cleaning. Our service enables Cif to keep evolving and connecting with new audiences and adapt to changing digital consumer lifestyles.”

 Unilever Foundry, a global platform for startups to collaborate with Unilever’s 400+brands, has been an entry point for innovative tech companies for over three years, piloting over 100 startups with Unilever brands in that time.

 More information about  startup collaborations with Unilever Foundry:  https://foundry.unilever.com/

 Press Contact: Tom Careless Junior Account Executive +44 (0)20 3301 2086  www.kaper.uk.com


