Young finance professionals in Northern England more satisfied than those in London

January 9, 2017

Ambitious ‘generation next’ based in the north of England have greater career satisfaction than young professionals in London according to a survey into career aspirations by ACCA (the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants).

 ACCA’s survey of its youngest members and students, dubbed Generation Next, backed by a separate poll conducted by Com Res, uncovered that 61% of young people living in major cities in the north of England are more satisfied in their current role than in London (49%).

 Polling over 2,000 professionals in the UK under the age of 36, the research reflects the availability of great career opportunities in the north. More young professionals in the north (16%) felt that there were no barriers to career progression at their current organisation compared to Londoners (12%).

 According to John Williams, head of ACCA UK, these statistics are a welcome boost to the Northern Powerhouse in its fight to attract and retain talent. “At present, there is still a perception among many young professionals that career opportunities in the northern region are less valuable than opportunities in the south,” he said. “Boosting economic growth in the north of England through initiatives such as the Northern Powerhouse is a key economic strategy for the UK government and improving the attractiveness of the region in terms of career opportunities is crucial if this is to be achieved in the long term.”

 John Williams continues, “The perception that there is a lack of career opportunities in the north is hugely damaging to its overall attractiveness. 16% of young people in the north of England work in large corporate firms with over £2.4 billion turnover, similar to those from London (17%) showcasing that there are fantastic career opportunities in the north as well as in the south of England.

 “We surveyed over 500 British adults aged 20-25 about their attitudes around careers and jobs in northern England earlier this year in our ‘Careers in the Corporate Sector’ research. 41% (two in five) believe corporate careers are London focussed, while 49% said a city in another country was a more attractive place to work than UK cities outside of London. The north is failing to attract a vital supply of finance professionals who will underpin the success of the region in the future. ”

 Across the UK, accountants and finance professionals are playing an increasingly important role in business success: not just in the traditional functions of reporting and audit, but also as strategic business advisers. Those equipped with such an in-demand skillset should see the possibilities of applying their experience in positions outside of London as they offer a good quality of life in addition to career growth.

 John Williams said “In the north of England, the challenge ahead for employers large and small is to make sure that they provide the flexible work environment and clear path for progression to attract and retain the best talent of the next generation”.


