Playkey Launches ICO Revolutionizing the Gaming Market with Cloud-based Platform

November 13, 2017

Playkey.io announced – it has opened its public sale of tokens for the Playkey decentralized cloud-based gaming platform, which token sale will last until the end of November.Playkey’s technology lets a player run state-of-the-art games from any device connected to the Internet, including old and low-powered PCs.

 Now the company is harnessing the power of more than 100 servers at data centers in London, Frankfurt, Amsterdam, and Moscow. Following the ICO, Playkey’s operational model will change, switching to a P2P arrangement where any owner of a powerful computer can rent out his own hardware to another user.“We conducted a very effective presale campaign that attracted investments from large funds as well as added highly qualified advisors,” said Egor Gurjev, СЕО and cofounder of Playkey. “They’re advising us on P2P, mining, cloud-based gaming, VR, and ICOs. In the ICO we plan to transform the Playkey model and by using blockchain technology we will scale the business to encompass video gamers globally.”Several influential and innovative leaders in the gaming and blockchain fields have joined the company as advisors, including David Carlson, CEO and founder of the biggest mining farm, GigaWatt; Michael Kim, CEO and founder of MPlay, CoinInside; and former senior executive of Blizzard, Wargaming and Havok; Dillon Seo, CEO and founder of VoleR Creative, cofounder of Oculus VR; and Ruben Godfrey, cofounder of the Blockchain Association of Ireland, among others.In the ICO a total of 100 million PKT tokens will be issued, of which 60 million PKT will be available for purchase. The token will be priced at 0.004 ETH. All unsold PKT tokens will be destroyed at the end of the sale.

 At the presale stage of the ICO campaign, the company collected more than $3.9 million. That included $1 million from the American fund Uncharted Capital and over $1 million from Allrise Financial Group. While preparing for the full-scale token sale, the Playkey team won the Slush Singapore Pitch Competition, in which 300 startups participated, and also received a top spot at the pitch contest at Europe’s leading blockchain conference, #d10e in Kiev.

 About Playkey

 More than 2 million players per month use the Playkey cloud-based video gaming platform. The platform uses more than 100 servers based on NVIDIA GRID, located in London, Frankfurt, Amsterdam, and Moscow. Playkey has more than 45 R&D professionals on its staff, and partnership agreements have already been signed with gaming companies such as Ubisoft, Bethesda, and Wargaming. The Playkey project previously took in $2.8 million of investments from a large European venture-capital fund. For additional information, please visit playkey.io.


