SuperCharger HK 2018 raises US$14.4m and seals 47 commercial deals

June 15, 2018

SuperCharger FinTech Accelerator and Standard Chartered demonstrated the success of its programme for a third year running. Through the 12-week programme, the cohort companies have achieved 47 commercial deals, US$ 14.4 million funds raised, received 17 awards and formed a network of 372 mentors, partners, regulators and business stakeholders.

 Standard Chartered has newly launched a proof-of-concept with vPhrase, one of the finalists of the current cohort, whose artificial intelligence technology can help the Compliance function automate the generation of insights and commentary, and make the report writing process more efficient. The analysis and commentary will include trends on regions, business and functions to help inform the senior management and assist them in making better business decisions using data.

 This year’s programme has taken one step further to guide Supercharger’s search for the best fintechs, with Standard Chartered first defining a set of real problems to solve. This rigorous process has helped increase the value of this collaboration to both the fintechs, as well as the Bank.

 Since 2015, SuperCharger has led the growth of the local and regional FinTech ecosystem. Janos Barberis, Founder of SuperCharger said: “Reflecting on what was achieved in the last three years is humbling. We can now confidently say that being a SuperCharger alumni is a sign of quality for clients and investors, as confirmed by the number of deals closed and the amount raised to date. In addition, we were able to give back to our community with the launch of Asia’s first Fintech Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) with the University of Hong Kong, which enrolled over 20,000 students to date, including the employees of Standard Chartered.”

 Carol Hung, Chief Information Officer of Standard Chartered Hong Kong, said: “We are looking for greater collaboration with fintechs to help us solve real business problems and improve the client experience. Supercharger is one of our key initiatives to source the most innovative solutions across the fintech ecosystem and to nurture the next generation of FinTech entrepreneurs that could potentially shape banking trends.”

 In April, Standard Chartered officially opened its Hong Kong innovation lab, the eXellerator. This will further accelerate co-creation opportunities for businesses, clients, technology companies and industry partners in Hong Kong and the region, to come together and explore new ways to solve business problems and create new value propositions.

 The Bank also launched SC Ventures this year. This is a new business unit set up with the vision to “rewire the DNA in banking”. It aims to build on the eXellerator success, and create a platform to identify and develop multiple innovative ideas across the Bank, supported by a bank-wide intrapreneurship programme to embed innovation into the way the Bank works. SC ventures will also make strategic investments in promising fintech start-ups which we are working with, and set up new ventures to explore new business models.

 About Standard Chartered

 Standard Chartered are an international banking group, with more than a 150-year history in some of the world’s most dynamic markets. Their purpose is to drive commerce and prosperity through our unique diversity, and Standard Chartered’s heritage and values are expressed in their brand promise, here for good.

 Standard Chartered are present in more than 60 markets, with over 1,000 branches and around 3,000 ATMs. 

 Standard Chartered PLC is listed on the London and Hong Kong Stock Exchanges as well as the Bombay and National Stock Exchanges in India.

 The history of Standard Chartered in Hong Kong dates back to 1859. It is currently one of the Hong Kong SAR’s three note-issuing banks. Standard Chartered incorporated its Hong Kong business on 1 July 2004, and now operates as a licensed bank in Hong Kong under the name of Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of Standard Chartered PLC.

 About SuperCharger Fintech Accelerator

 Leveraging on Hong Kong’s traditional strength as Asia’s finance and technology gateway, SuperCharger is a 12-week Fintech Accelerator Program backed by Standard Chartered Bank, among others. In its previous batch, SuperCharger received over 200 applications from more than 30 countries globally, and selected 8 Finalists. The companies typically range from early-stage to late-stage growth Fintechs and the program alumni have since raised over US$370 million combined. The startups are enriched by the support and mentorship of more than 150 individuals, including VCs, industry experts, government officials, journalists and the next generation of young entrepreneurs.

 SuperCharger’s finalists and alumni are shaping the future of finance in Hong Kong and beyond.


