Amazon, Apple And The Post Office Among The Big Winners At The Emerging Payments Awards 2017

October 9, 2017

London, UK. 6 October 2017 – Big name industry giants and innovative new British FinTech organisations were recognised last night at the tenth annual Emerging Payments Awards in London.

 Recognising and celebrating the best the payments industry has to offer, the Emerging Payments Awards were presented at The Hilton, Park Lane in London on Thursday 5th October.

 Industry big-hitters Amazon Pay were recognised for Best Online Payments Solution, while Best Proximity or Contactless Payment Solution went to Apple Pay for its Ticket Restaurant. Meanwhile the Post Office’s Travel Money Card won Best Consumer Card Loaded Programme.

 As the UK FinTech scene continues to shift with new regulatory changes that promote greater innovation and more choice, newer names also emerged victorious with London-based PrePay Solutions (PPS) coming away with the Leading Regulated Organisation award, while cloud-based digital banking business Payment Cloud Technologies (PCT) won the coveted Leading Emerging Payments Organisation award.

 Tony Craddock, Chairman, Emerging Payments Awards, commented: “Every year the quality of entrants to the Emerging Payments Awards goes from strength to strength. Now in our tenth year and one of the annual highlights of the FinTech calendar, we’re thrilled to see so much innovation from the UK and further afield as FinTech continues to push into the mainstream, making a real difference to consumers’ lives around the world.”

 The full list of winners for 2017 is as follows:

 Best Banking Initiative – Tieto develops Kenya’s first real time payments platform-PesaLink

 Best Online Payments Solution – Amazon Pay

 Best Proximity or Contactless Payment Solution – Apple Pay for Ticket Restaurant

 Best Consumer Card Loaded Programme – Post Office Travel Money Card

 Best Corporate/Government Loaded Payments Programme – The Cashplus Business Account

 Silver Award – C3 Payroll Card

 Best Incentive Card or Programme – The New look ecommerce gift card program by WeGift

 Silver Award – CashStar: Hooters’ Endless Craving Card

 Best Cross Border Payment Solution or use of FX – Currencycloud unlocks 5-trillion-dollar a day FX market with GPS

 Silver Award – Saxo Payments Banking Circle

 Best New Customer facing Innovation – Curve; connecting your financial world

 Best New Back Office Innovation – Cybertonica: A thriving Artificial Intelligence technology partner committed to grow e/m-commerce businesses and build their customers’ trust.

 Best PSP or Acquiring Solution Provider – Paysafe Group – Payment Processing and Acquiring

 Silver Award – AEVI’s Open Ecosystem

 Best Retailer Adoption of Emerging Payments Technology – InComm Europe & Currys PC World Trade In Program

 Best Physical or Virtual Design – SumUp Air Card Reader

 Emerging Payments Marketing Campaign of the Year – Bacs: The Current Account Switch Service’s Switch Guarantee Guy

 Best Service Organisation supporting the Emerging Payments Industry – Saxo Payments Banking Circle

 Leading Regulated Organisation – PrePay Solutions – Heading up the industry

 Leading Emerging Payments Organisation – The PCT Difference

 Leading Payments Start-Up – Capital on Tap – Business Rewards Card

 Emerging Payments Entrepreneur of the Year – Tony Kerr and Craig Dewar: entrepreneurial vision means no compromises for GPS

 Best CSR or Charity Initiative – The digital charity box from Pennies and K3 Retail

 Industry Contributor of the Year – Nick Ogden, ClearBank

 About the Emerging Payments Awards

 The Emerging Payments Awards are the highlight of the payments innovation calendar in the UK. This year will be the Emerging Payments Awards tenth year of celebrating the best of the best in the FinTech industry, covering 20 award categories.

 The awards celebrate innovation, collaboration and emerging payments by recognising companies that have made significant advances in how we pay today. As the payments industry has boomed, so have the awards. The winners are announced in style at a glittering ceremony attended by 700 of the industry’s most senior opinion-formers and decision-makers.

 Further Information: EPA http://emergingpayments.org/about/  


