FIFA 17 is now available in Russia through Yandex.Money

December 16, 2016

Yandex.Money became the official sales operator of the popular game publisher EA Games. Russian users can now buy FIFA 17 for PC and Xbox through Yandex.Money. FIFA Points for topping up balance are also available for purchase at Yandex.Money website.
Users can buy the game and top up their balance paying from an e-wallet or any bank card – there is no need to be registered with the service. This December, Yandex.Money clients, buying the PC version of the game or FIFA Points with an assigned value of 590, 909, 1190 or 2390 Russian rubles, will receive a cash back to their e-wallet – 12% of the amount spent.
More than 3000 digital products are now available at Yandex.Money website, including games by Electronic Arts, Blizzard Entertainment, Wargaming.net, Nintendo, games distributed by Steam as well as iTunes content codes.
FIFA 17 is one of the most anticipated installments of the franchise. It comes back with a new graphics engine, revised gameplay and a brand new take on a single-player career mode – aka FIFA Story Mode.
According to 2016 research by TNS Russia, PC and console games are bought by 19% of internet users aged 18 to 55 years. 11% of Russian gamers pay with e-wallets, 10% pay with bank cards, 9% prefer to use online banking. In accordance with the latest Yandex.Money study, women spend on games a bit more money compared to men: 4% against 3% of the funds spent at the service. As to the gamers occupation, students spend on virtual entertainment the most — 10% of their overall expenses. The percentage of gamers is higher among the Android users than the iOS fans: 20% and 17% respectively.

 About Yandex.Money
Yandex.Money is the largest electronic payments service in Russia, according to a 2016 survey by TNS. The service is the joint venture of the search engine Yandex (NASDAQ: YNDX), and Sberbank. Yandex.Money offers consumers easy, safe, and reliable methods of paying online on its own site and mobile app. The service hosts about 28 million user accounts with about 15,000 new accounts opened daily. Yandex.Money also offers online merchants Yandex.Checkout. The service allows merchants to accept all the online payment methods most popular among Russians: credit cards, e-wallets, mobile billing through the top Russian providers, and cash via over 250,000 cash-acceptance points all over the country and CIS. Currently, more than 76,000 online stores across the globe use Yandex.Checkout.


