Artemis Investment Management Goes Live With pControl For NAV Oversight

October 24, 2017

London – 24th October 2017: Milestone Group, provider of managed technology solutions globally for the investment management industry, today announced that Artemis Investment Management LLP (Artemis) has gone live with pControl Oversight across its unit trusts, OEICs, investment trusts and venture capital trusts.

 As Artemis’ product range has continued to evolve, the number and complexity of its fund structures has increased. Artemis has chosen Milestone’s technology to introduce a greater degree of automation of its oversight activities.

 pControl Oversight has enabled Artemis to enhance its oversight of its third-party administrator in relation to daily fund pricing. The system allows a large volume of data to be processed and checked in a more efficient manner, via an automated, standardised and scalable process across Artemis’ range of funds.

 Paul Roberts, Managing Director of Milestone Group in EMEA, added: “We are delighted to welcome Artemis to our growing client community who are establishing oversight best practice in their retained operations. Having one fully automated system for oversight is a critical capability for firms as they seek to meet regulatory requirements in an efficient and scalable way.

 “Milestone Group’s clients continue to benefit from our commitment and ongoing investment in providing the market leading oversight solution. Through our latest release, Artemis are able to take advantage of an extended library of oversight validations available as well as our proprietary Back-up NAV methodology.”

  About Artemis

 Artemis is a leading UK-based fund manager, offering a range of funds which invest in the UK, Europe, the US and around the world. As a dedicated, active investment manager, Artemis specialises in investment management for both retail and institutional investors.

 The firm now manages some £26.4 billion across a range of funds, two investment trusts, a venture capital trust and both pooled and segregated institutional portfolios.

 About Milestone Group

 Milestone Group is a specialist global provider of managed technology solutions for institutional investors, including asset managers, outsourced CIOs, pension and superannuation funds, and life companies.

 pControl is an advanced technology platform designed to service today’s increasingly complex pooled investment structures and related business processes. It supports multiple business functions in a single environment and incorporates fully integrated data management, end-to-end process control and powerful exception management capabilities. pControl delivers superior efficiency, transparency, product flexibility and control across front, middle and back offices for internal and external institutional investment managers.

 Press Contact:
Emilie Rowe, Aspectus, on behalf of Milestone Group
+44 20 7242 8867
milestone@aspectuspr.com


