Project Transparency Launched By Sixteen Industry Leaders 

October 2, 2017

Aragon, Cofound.it, District0x, Encrypgen, Etherisc, Hcash, Iconomi, Indorse, Lykke, Santiment, Dappbase, GATCOIN, IconiqLab, Virgil Capital, Musiconomi and Maecenas jointly launch a voluntary disclosure initiative called, Project Transparency. 

 ·       Goal to create a self-regulated, industry led movement towards greater transparency and accountability within the Blockchain sector for investors and the community

 ·       16 pre and post ICO projects, accelerators, professional services & hedge fund in the blockchain and the cryptocurrency industry unite to launch this self-regulated initiative

 ·       Project Transparency represents > $650M USD in market capitalisation

 ·       Aim to improve regulatory procedures and disclosure within digital currency sector

 ·       Ambition for industry-wide adoption of Project Transparency for clearer disclosures

 Santiment, the world’s first crypto-market datafeed platform, today announces at the Vienna ICO-Summit that it has worked with 15 other projects to launch Project Transparency.

 The voluntary initiative aims to encourage disclosure of wallets controlled by a project and provide a voluntary explanation of any expenditure greater than 0.5% of the funds collected. Santiment joins a number of ethical, industry leading digital asset industry players including, Aragon, Cofound.it, District0x, Encrypgen, Etherisc, Hcash, Iconomi, Indorse, Lykke, Dappbase, GATCOIN, IconiqLab, Virgil Capital, Musiconomi and Maecenas to present the long term ambition is to provide potential investors and the community with greater transparency and accountability for funds raised as the ICO space sees greater regulatory scrutiny in many markets and even legal restriction in China and Korea.

 Maksim Balashevich, CEO and Founder of Santiment, said: With the rapid rise of digital currencies and proliferation of ICOs, investors increasingly want security regarding their funds and transparency on how they are administered. Santiment was developed to provide insight and transparency to investors looking to enter illiquid and highly volatile markets, Project Transparency affirms our commitment to improving governance in the Blockchain sector.

 Santiment has confirmed that it will provide funding for Project Transparency’s web page and for manpower to process applications and keep the initiative staffed. Any Blockchain project can join the initiative, the only criteria is to disclose the wallets controlled, funds held and explain any expenditures over 0.5% of the funds raised.

 GANDI is a domain name registrar and cloud hosting company. Free website, SSL certificate, blog, and e-mail included. VPS dedicated virtual servers, cloud hosting.With over $650M USD of market capitalisation represented by Project Transparency, there is significant momentum for this industry led initiative. The evolution of next generation levels of transparency is important as it matures and continues its journey towards self governance in the tokenized economy.

 Taiyang Zhang CEO of pre-ICO project Dappbase, and GATCOIN’s Simon Cheong explained that their support for Project Transparency stemmed from their imminent funding goals and the investor interest for this voluntary disclosure: “transparency drives better, sustainable business. And that’s what we want.”

 About Santiment: Santiment is the world’s first crypto-market big data network, combining market datafeeds, sentiment analysis, blockchain analytics, and everything else crypto-traders need for this emerging market. Built by traders for traders, the network gives participants an information edge over the competitors thanks to machine learning and the wisdom of the crowd.

 Contact:

 Dorjee Sun: dorjee.s@santiment.net +61 416 292 245 WhatsApp:  +65 9777 0416 Skype: dorjee.sun


