Open Banking: the landscape by 2025

May 26, 2018

Koen Pelgrims, Director, Customer Experience Solutions and Open Banking, Global Financial Services, Atos.

 Open Banking is here. The Second Payment Services Directive (PSD2) now requires banks to give any third party access to use payments data and launch transactions from a customer’s bank account, subject to permission. It’s a radical idea; and while there will undoubtedly be impacts, the exact nature and timeframes of the disruption are still becoming clear.

 Getting the measure

 Although the range of possibilities and changes around Open Banking may sometimes seem confusing, essentially, they fall into five key categories.

 Rapid shifts and slower burns

 So, how disruptive are these different types of service likely to be by 2025? On the one hand, the first two will clearly have major shorter term impacts as merchants and new players reinvent the value chain. On the other, it’s easy to see the potential for new lending and personal finance management facilities that extend consumers’ power and choice and give new players ownership of direct customer relationships. However, the success of these types of services will heavily depend on take-up.

 Broadly speaking, when it comes to banking, consumers often stick to what they know – in fact, it is said that we’re more likely to change our life partner than we are to change our bank. It’s useful to look to the de-regulation of the energy market as an indicator. It took a few years for a critical mass of consumers to act, and a yearly saving of around £290 before people switched utility providers.

 Staying agile

 PSD2 does, however, go a long way to level the playing field. And with incumbents and new players all looking for similar ideas, collaboration is the best way to gain the edge. Smaller market entrants should look to develop white-labelled services that can be branded by governments or bigger institutions and seamlessly plugged into larger ecosystems. In turn, incumbents need to keep a close watch on the kind of differentiated services and innovations that FinTechs are devising. They also need to evaluate what is core, and what could be outsourced to reshape their organisation and infrastructure to be agile enough to operate in a more open and dynamic environment.

 The ability to engage and add value to consumers will no longer be just the preserve of banks; it will be shared with FinTechs, digital companies, retailers and other innovators. As well as being the advent of Open Banking, PSD2 is the prelude to ongoing disruption as regulators liberate other parts of banking into the market. Any institution needs to act now – not just to embrace PSD2, but to be ready for future directives.


