High Net Worth Investors Favour Fintech, Capitama Finds

May 28, 2018

Fintech is the most popular sector among high net worth and professional investors, according to Capitama, the direct private investment platform.  Analysis of the preferences of the registered investors of Capitama, which includes more than 300 individuals, family offices, PE firms and investment offices has indicated that fintech and technology investment opportunities more generally are the two most popular sectors among investors.

 Capitama’s current registered investors have a total annual investment capacity of £7.6bn. Of this total capacity, investors have expressed an annual investment capacity of £5bn into Private Equity opportunities, with £2.3bn total annual investment in Debt and Income opportunities. The interest of the registered investors in Philanthropic and Social Impact opportunities currently stands at £300m per year. This is an additional theme on Capitama given the rise in interest in these organisations from wealthy individuals and organisations.

 69% of Capitama investors are interested in fintech investment opportunities and 67% want to see software and technology deals. Of the nine different investment types available on Capitama, Growth funding is the most popular, with 83% of Capitama registered Investors interested in this area, followed by Early stage investments (72%), Buy-outs (63%), and Real Estate (47%).

 Simon Ramery, Co-Founder and CEO at Capitama, said: “Fintech is a sector that has seen huge growth in the past three years and evidence suggests it’s just the start. Our data shows that investors see real value in the companies operating in this space, and that they see a strong future for the UK fintech scene despite Brexit.

 “We’re also really excited about the commitment of investors to look at philanthropic and social impact investing.  £300m is a considerable total of investable capital and we hope to be able to help put this to good use.”

 Brett de Bank, Co-Founder and Managing Director at Capitama, said: “Over half of our registered investors are individuals, showing that private investment is a thriving and growing trend. This community is interested in a diverse range of investment opportunities, from buy-out, to growth and philanthropic opportunities but principally having more control and choice over where they invest their capital.

 “We launched Capitama with the aim to help businesses raise capital and scale their businesses efficiently. As we continue to grow and introduce more Investors to the platform we hope to help more companies reach their potential.”

 Capitama currently has 12 live opportunities, amongst those include Simba Sleep, an online mattress supplier and one of the UK’s fastest growing company’s’, Quiqup an innovative on demand, last mile logistics services and solutions company and City Harvest a food redistribution charity. Via Capitama, City Harvest is seeking £2.5m of additional investment to deliver 23,000 nutritious meals a week to those living in poverty in London.

 About Capitama

 Capitama is the direct private investment platform for sophisticated and professional investors. It provides private investors such as UHNWIs and HWNIs, Family Offices, venture capital firms and sovereign wealth funds access to sponsor backed investment opportunities across a variety of asset classes. Capitama’s target investment areas include early stage, growth, buy-outs, real estate, debt and income, as well as philanthropic and social impact investing and donations.

 Capitama is an independent, owner managed business, by entrepreneurs for fellow entrepreneurs. Responding to the increased interest in direct investing, Capitama gives investors more discretion and choice as to where they invest their capital, alongside more traditional offerings.


