Luxury treats for Men and Fathers this June

June 28, 2017

June sees a lot of Father’s Day fuss but we don’t think a day is enough. This column is all about little luxuries whatever the time of year, but in keeping with the spirit of the month, we’ve dug out those special things that really would make any man or dad’s – day, week, month or year. So whether you just want to spoil yourself or treat a man in your life, these gor- geous luxuries are sure to please.

 There’s something undeniably indulgent about a hand-crafted leather briefcase. The J Style Single Pocket Briefcase  from Picketts & Co is handmade in England by British craftsmen inbeautiful quality naturally tanned bridle leather. It comes with a traditional polished solid brass lock in black, brown or tan options and is a classic that’s set to endure and give pleasure for years. (from £595).

 

 Even in this IT-age, there’s still nothing more decadent than a fountain pen. The new Lamy Dialog 3 Pen with its 14k gold nib and special cap-less twist design, gives this classic pen a modern yet highly practical edge – the newest gadget pen around – and it’s available in palladium and black. (£229.50). As gadgets go, this must be up there as one of the best for small gardens. The robotic lawnmower, Robomow RX has been designed specifically for smaller London gardens and mows automatically at regular intervals, leaving you free to enjoy the post-mow cold beer a little sooner! (£500).

 For a little grooming luxury, Legends of London offers the finest authentic products with modern flair, from their hair gel and pomade designed by traditional barbers, to their 100% natural Alum matches which come in a handy matchbook size. These scooped Best Beauty Product 2017 and are great for soothing razor burn and irritated skin on the run. (from £6).

 It’s not often you’d put men & cushions in the same sentence, but award-winning and renowned London designer Andrew Martin has really hit the spot with these
retro Beatles tapestry cushions in red or taupe. Handmade in the UK, they picture the iconic Fab Four during their Sergeant Pepper era – and look great as a contrasting pair (£49 each).

 Foodie treats come no finer than the award-winning ‘Man Box’ from London’s Ross & Ross Foods. Containing a brilliant selection of must-have-man-goodies, it includes beer, chutney, salami and crackling (from £21 to £40). They also offer home cure kits for aspiring chefs as opposed to dedicated gourmandes.

 And finally, who doesn’t love a box of chocolates to spoil someone whether it’s Father’s Day or not! These new Gold Icons from Godiva are deliciously moreish with fabulous flavours and bound to disappear quickly, father or not! 6-piece/18-piece gift boxes are available. (£10/£25).

 Emily MAN
SON

 Where to find these little luxuries …

 • thelegendslondon.com

 • andrewmartin.co.uk

 • penheaven.co.uk

 • www.pickett.co.uk

 • robomow.com/en-GB

 • rossandrossfood.co.uk

 Father’s Day delights at the Montcalm Royal London House For dads with a dash of style and a taste for the finer things in life, there’s only one place to be this month. Welcomed with a selection of whiskeys on arrival, treated to drinks in the Club Lounge, a toolbox of in-room treats and a special gift, this special Dad’s stay is sure to please. With a full English breakfast and chilling time in the urban spa also included, make the most of this fabulous offer, available until 20 June, only at the five star Montcalm Royal London House hotel. To book & for full T&Cs visit montcalmroyallondoncity.co.uk

 If you want to be featured in the lifestyle section, contact katia@fintnews.com


