Pennies’ Digital Charity Box Now Accepting In-App Donations With Apple Pay

September 20, 2017

Pennies, the fintech charity, digitises the traditional collection tin – enabling consumers to round-up or top-up by a few pence when they pay. Over the last seven years, Pennies has collected over 40 millon micro-donations across 60 participating retailers, including Domino’s, Boots Opticians, and Virgin Holidays.

 The move gives customers the opportunity to donate using the digital charity box and Apple Pay for the first time – matching the fastest growing mobile wallet with the fastest expanding UK fintech charity.

 Alison Hutchinson CBE, CEO of Pennies said: “We’re thrilled to be able to expand the micro-donation movement across the UK via retailers’ apps and Apple Pay, and to support many more causes and communities as a result. This announcement changes the pace of feel-good giving in the UK, meaning millions more customers could give their small change a big purpose through retailers like Domino’s.”

 Simon Wallis, Chief Operating Officer at the nation’s favourite pizza, Domino’s, who were first to go live with Pennies said:

 “As a company dedicated to digital innovation, we’re excited to offer our generous customers the opportunity to make a difference with their small change through In-App donations with Pennies. Since partnering with Pennies at their launch in 2010, our pizza fans have already donated millions to charity, including over £1.2M for Teenage Cancer Trust, and this is another Pennies first we’re extremely proud of.”

 Pennies’ micro-donations are data-free, quick, and a choice every time. The retailer chooses the charity that its customers can support.  No personal data is collected, and there is no follow up; it really is about dropping a few pence in a charity box – but via a debit or credit card or a mobile wallet, such as In-App donations with Apple Pay.

 Security and privacy is at the core of Apple Pay.  When you use a credit or debit card with Apple Pay, the actual card numbers are not stored on the device or on Apple servers.  Instead, a unique Device Account Number is assigned, encrypted and securely stored in the Secure Element on your device. Each transaction is authorised with a one-time unique dynamic security code.

 Apple Pay is easy to set up and users will continue to receive all of the rewards and beneﬁts offered by credit and debit cards.  In stores, Apple Pay works with iPhone SE, iPhone 6 and later, and Apple Watch.

 Online shopping in apps and on websites accepting Apple Pay is as simple as the touch of a finger with Touch ID, so there is no need to manually fill out lengthy account forms or repeatedly type in shipping and billing information.  When paying for goods and services on the go in apps or Safari, Apple Pay works with iPhone 6 and later, iPhone SE, iPad Pro, iPad Air 2, and iPad mini 3 and later.  You can also use Apple Pay in Safari on any Mac introduced in or after 2012 running macOS Sierra and confirm the payment with iPhone 6 or later or Apple Watch, or with Touch ID on the new MacBook Pro.

 For more information on Apple Pay, visit: https://www.apple.com/uk/apple-pay/

 About Pennies

 * Research of 2025 UK adults carried out by Markettiers 4DC on behalf of Pennies, October-November 2016. Question asked: ‘If you saw that a retailer offered the option to round up or top up your purchase with a donation to charity, would this a) Improve your opinion of the retailer (25.2%) b) Lessen your opinion of the retailer (11.6%) c) Make no difference to your opinion of the retailer (63.3%)

 Press Contact: Rob Dyson, Head of Marketing and Communications at Pennies on 07813 091 970 / rob.dyson@pennies.org.uk.

  


