VIPR partners with JDX Consulting to deliver new first-class managed service

April 27, 2017

In its ongoing pursuit to deliver high quality service for customers, VIPR, leading providers of software solutions for the insurance industry, has launched VIPR Managed Service (VMS). The new offering, in collaboration with global consulting group JDX, provides end-to-end management of VIPR systems to ensure a simplified and efficient approach for clients’ IT needs – with an emphasis in the area of delegated authority.

 VIPR found that a number of its clients were not maximising the benefits of their VIPR software. Richard Brown, Managing Director of VIPR states, “Our systems are intuitive and easy to use, however it is not uncommon to find that clients do not always have time or the resource to get the best from their systems. In particular, with staff moving on, new starters often do not get trained effectively due to time constraints, which creates a knowledge gap and inconsistencies when using the software. Time pressures also mean that bordereaux are sometimes left unprocessed and monitoring the performance of mass data is compromised.” Brown continues, “We have also had feedback from clients who use third parties including overseas consultants to manage their data. Unfortunately the lack of knowledge and language barrier has led to a mishandling of data. VMS offers a solution to help reduce these pressures on our clients and optimise their systems.” VIPR chose its partner carefully, teaming up with JDX for Insurance, part of JDX Consulting. Based in London, the consultancy offers a pool of talent, skilled in supporting clients‘ resourcing requirements within the insurance industry. Working with VIPR, the team is at the forefront of technology changes, regulatory pressures and modernisation of the insurance market. Through VMS, VIPR’s clients can choose from a menu of services, including; bordereaux mapping bordereaux processing, Solvency II reporting, and consultancy. “We are delighted to be working with VIPR to provide a new service for their clients,” said Hugh Evans, CEO, JDX for Insurance. “Together, our goal is to deliver a first-class service helping reduce the costs and complexity of managing software internally.” Brown concludes, “Customer service is extremely important to VIPR and through our collaboration with JDX we are able to offer a fully managed bordereaux management solution allowing clients to optimise their resources.”

 For more information on VIPR Managed Service


