Huddlestock Launches Innovative New Investment Platform

April 24, 2017

Huddlestock, an online platform that enables the public to create tailored investment portfolios, has gone live today in the UK. The unique platform gives investors the tools and research only previously available to professional institutions such as investment funds and high net-worth individuals.

 The revolutionary financial platform was created by a team of entrepreneurs, hedge-fund professionals and technologists focused on a single goal – to enable the public to invest in the financial markets and reap the same benefits professional speculators have done for decades.

 Huddlestock was established by co-founders Chief Executive Officer Murshid M. Ali, serial entrepreneur and PhD candidate in Economics on leave, and Øyvind Hovland, also a serial entrepreneur, both from Stavanger, in Norway, and Chief Investment Officer Michael Van Tol, who holds a PhD in Financial Econometrics, and has a decade of experience in the hedge-fund industry.

 Since its inception, the company has raised around £2 million from Norwegian Family Offices, the Norwegian Research Council and Innovation Norway, and established its main office at Level39 in London. Following the live launch, the intention is for Huddlestock to become a global entity via three trading hubs in major financial centres; London, New York and Hong Kong.

 Murshid M. Ali said there were no barriers to using Huddlestock’s investment platform.

 “The unique value proposition from Huddlestock is a new way of making money for strategy vendors and users. The financial industry has long kept the general public from the golden pot, restricting regular people from gaining access to better investments,” he said.

 Huddlestock is building a community where people connect and find investment ideas that suit them best. The strategy vendors make suggestions, but the users have freedom of choice. Its approach involves no upfront fees; vigilant screening to block illegal and corrupt sources; access to advisors and the promotion of a healthy way to invest.

  

  


