TraderStars.io To Launch First Ever Financial Skills Tournament Platform

October 10, 2017

TraderStars.io (www.TraderStars.io) to launch the first global financial skills tournament platform that aims to promote competitive trading in a secure, transparent and regulated environment.To be licensed by the Malta Gaming Authority, on this one of a kind platform participants do not risk their money, a small participation fee and prize pool is agreed to in advance with clear rules and terms defined.

 The Platform will allow users to compete with each other by trading in all available markets, with no risk and clear terms & conditions

 Aims to build a community that shares knowledge and competes in a fair and regulated environment that rewards talent and skill

 Traders compete in tournaments using virtual money and real market data

 Built on blockchain with smart contracts to ensure quality, auditability, transparency and assurance of results

 Targeting users within the 4m global FX traders* and 1bn gamers**

 Traders compete against other participants from around the world, not against the market, and can choose to participate in tournaments that suit their knowledge, skills, desired fee and prize potential. Performance is relative to peer group with returns on investment exceeding anything possible for the same time period on the stock market.

 Traders compete in set tournaments using virtual money and real market data, with winners awarded from the shared prize pool and can play in as many tournaments at the same time as they want.TraderStars.io is available on all markets. Another large focus of the platform is to build a community that shares knowledge and competes in a fair and transparent environment that rewards talent and skill.

 In a world with over 4m global FX traders and 1bn gamers, TraderStars.io is bringing a platform that engages a truly massive global market.TraderStars.io is also bringing an innovative technological approach by using Blockchain technology and a dedicated token to ensure auditability, transparency, quality and assure enforcement of fair terms and results.

 Created by veterans and entrepreneurs from the FX, brokerage and trading industries and partnered with successful brands such as the FX and cryptocurrency broker SimpleFX and the licensed Australian broker IFMTrade, TraderStars.io has put together a combination tailored for changing both gaming and trading.

 “TraderStars.io is bringing a new element to both the gaming and the trading ecosystems while also bringing a new dynamic to the risks and returns involved. Let’s just say it’s is a very exciting time to launch a platform like this. As technological and regulatory barriers are rapidly changing, TraderStars.io offers a unique opportunity to anyone interested in learning about financial markets and investing. Irrespective of their background or education, they can now potentially earn large rewards in an entertaining and dynamic environment,” said TraderStars.io Co Founder and CEO Tomasz Szymanski.

 TraderStars.io operates a simple user interface where participants create their own account and make an Ethereum deposit via an established payment processor. It is available in any country through desktop, mobile phones and tablets in a variety of languages.

 With the gaming industry expected to grow to $90 billion by 2020, TraderStars.io is looking to bring a new type of gaming and play a significant role in the growth of the gaming industry and financial trading.

 TraderStars.io is also being an innovator with how its pushing further development and operations with a planned Blockchain token release and sale later this year.

 *Source: 2014 Lmax Exchange, CitiFX Pro, NFA

 **Source: 2017 Investment Company Factbook 57th edition

 

 About TraderStars.io:

 Trade for fun, win real moneyThe first and only global financial skills tournament platform, TraderStars.io allows users to compete with each other by trading in all available markets with clear terms and conditions and no risk.

 Traders compete in set tournaments using virtual money and real market data, with winners awarded from a shared prize pool. Traders do not risk their money as the small participation fee as well as prize potential are known in advance meaning the rules are clear and laid out with potential wins making returns of up to 40,000%.

 Traders compete against other participants, not against the market, and can choose to participate in tournaments that suit their knowledge, skills, desired fee and prize potential. TraderStars.io is set to be licensed by the Malta Gaming Authority.

 www.TraderStars.io

 Press Contact: 

 John McLeod JEA Associates john@jeaassociates.com


