Chris Skinner Joins Exscudo Advisory Board

October 2, 2017

We are happy to announce that fintech influencer Chris Skinner joined our team as an adviser. Chris will help us with marketing and strategic planning, he will provide a fresh, independent perspective, expertise, conduct an evaluation and make recommendations. He will work closely with management of the project making smart business decisions. Chris will perform an in-depth market analysis and identify the best opportunities for growth.

 Chris is an independent commentator on the financial markets through the Finanser, his daily blog, and chair of the European networking forum the Financial Services Club, which he founded in 2004. He speaks at lots of conferences and is a prolific author of 14 books. His last book “Digital Bank” is a best-seller. Chris has been voted one of the most influential people in banking by The Financial Brand (as well as one of the best blogs), a FinTech Titan (Next Bank), one of the Fintech Leaders you need to follow (City AM, Deluxe and Jax Finance), one of the Top 5 most influential people on Bank Info Security’s list of information security leaders, as well as one of the Top 40 most influential people in financial technology by the Wall Street Journal’s Financial News.

 Besides, Mr. Skinner is a regular commentator on BBC News, Sky News, CNBC and Bloomberg about banking issues and a Judge on many awards programs including the Asian Banker’s Retail Excellence Awards.

 “We are excited to work with Chris Skinner. His experience and expertise in fintech industry are exceptional. Chris genuinely understands the goals of the project and we are sure that work with him will enable us to achieve success. We’ve been extremely fortunate that Chris agreed to devote his time and talent to our project. We are happy that he takes an high level of interest and wishes to mentor us.”, Andrew Zimine, CEO of Exscudo, said.

 Chris  is a Fellow of the British Computer Society, a Fellow of the Institute of Management Services, an Associate of the Chartered Insurance Institute and a Chartered Insurance Practitioner. We are pleased to have Chris Skinner in our advisory board.

 Inna Goncharova, PR Director Exscudo https://exscudo.com/

  


