Givenchy & R/GA London Unveil Service-Orientated Online Platform

September 12, 2017

PARIS, September 12th, 2017 — As a prelude to the presentation of Clare Waight Keller’s first ready-to-wear collection for Givenchy, the house is pleased to unveil its sleek and intuitive new omni-channel e-commerce platform.

 Overseen by the house’s new artistic director and created in collaboration with the international digital innovation agency R/GA London www.rga.com, www.givenchy.com opens up the storied fashion house more than ever before. A highly engaging environment, supported by a 360° strategy covering online media, email and social media, offers followers the immediacy they crave and the freedom to curate their own Givenchy experience. Highlighting its striking new mood, www.givenchy.com opens with an intimate portrait of artistic director Clare Waight Keller and images from her first Givenchy advertising campaign, both shot by photographer Steven Meisel. Its crisp, fluid design emphasizes dynamic, immersive content mixing news, in-depth features and real-time access to fashion shows before, during and after the event. The chance to explore the Givenchy heritage or browse the archives blends seamlessly with of-the-moment features such as new releases, exclusives and the complete retail catalogue of women’s and men’s ready-to-wear and accessories collections, photographed in high resolution from up to eight different angles per product.

 To emphasize the personal experience at the heart of its philosophy, www.givenchy.com will host an online lottery offering three followers the chance to win an invitation to the Givenchy ready-to-wear show in Paris on October 1st. Fans and followers may register for the lottery on a dedicated URL appearing on city-wide poster campaigns in Paris, Milan, New York and London. Entries may be submitted from 10am Paris time September 25th until midnight September 27th. The Givenchy.com Experience Designed to enhance customer experience both online and offline, the new www.givenchy.com engages consumers directly across social media platforms and devices via exclusive web-to-store shopping features and products. To streamline navigation, www.givenchy.com features visual cues such as stylized variations on the 4G emblem and minimalistic, functional icons to guide visitors through high-impact images, videos, slideshows and in-depth articles.

 A unique display centralizes content, products and availability in one place: as visitors browse the fashion and accessories collections, photo galleries appear illustrating how items were shown on the runway and shot for look-books, how celebrities wore them and how they were styled for still-life images. Campaigns presenting the house’s new collections mingle with images of the in-store retail environment.

 On www.givenchy.com customers get to experience a seamless journey from aspirational content to e-commerce, all in one place. To optimize the shopping experience, Instagram-synergized content and a geo-localization feature allow customers to track down products wherever they are available, create wish lists or speak directly to a Givenchy representative for more information and schedule an in-store appointment. A commitment to couture-quality customer service makes it possible for customers to browse a gallery of exceptional pieces, such as embellished items, and schedule a fitting at the nearest flagship store. For shoppers in Paris, a dedicated Givenchy concierge service ensures white-glove, same-day delivery of purchases ordered online. Customers may also click and collect purchases at the Givenchy store nearest them. In due course, these e-commerce services will be extended to all Givenchy stores worldwide. Online Exclusives on Givenchy.com The house will be focusing on www.givenchy.com as its primary shopping destination. Exclusive limited editions and capsule collections designed by Clare Waight Keller will span product categories, from ready-to-wear to leather goods and jewelry.

 Exclusives and re-editions of classic designs will be recurring online features, with new pieces dropping every month. Immediately following Paris Fashion Week, www.givenchy.com will showcase the “White” collection, a new variation of the iconic Givenchy Paris design, with five pieces – a hoodie, sweater and t-shirt, and a Pandora mini bag and clutch – in white-on-white with full thread embroidery over the logo signature. The next capsule collection will be a Givenchy “Mini-Me” line for grown-ups and children, to be featured in early November 2017. As the primary resource for customer relationship management, www.givenchy.com will reinforce the brand’s relationships with top clients through customization, targeted recommendations and reward systems (first look, first access). Active promotion across the brand’s social platforms and online media display will increase synergy between Givenchy’s digital desirability and consumer-driven features.

 Givenchy.com will become shoppable in France upon the site’s e-commerce launch on September 25th, 2017. The site will be published in five languages, with e-commerce rollouts scheduled for European markets in early 2018 and North America and Asian markets in 2019.

 About Givenchy:

 Hubert de Givenchy founded his namesake fashion house specializing in Haute Couture and ready-to-wear in 1952. No sooner did it open than Givenchy earned a reputation for breaking with the fashion codes of its time. Today, the house is synonymous with aristocratic elegance, sensuality and fresh romanticism. Its legacy continues through the modern approach of its British-born Artistic Director, Clare Waight Keller, who was appointed in 2017 to design all Haute Couture and Ready-to- Wear collections for women and men.

 About R/GA

 R/GA is connected by design. An innovation leader for more than 40 years, R/GA has expanded to offer consulting, ventures, technology, marketing communications, architecture, and IP development services in addition to its award-winning design practice. Its work spans web, mobile, and social communications, retail and e-commerce, product innovation, brand development, and business transformation. The company has more than 2,000 employees globally with 19 offices across the United States, Europe, South America, and Asia-Pacific. R/GA is part of The Interpublic Group of Companies (NYSE:IPG), one of the world’s largest advertising and marketing services organizations. For more information about R/GA, please visit www.rga.com and on Facebook and Twitter.

 Press Contact: George Griffiths, PR Director at R/GA george.griffiths@rga.com


