Blockchain and cryptocurrency elite confirmed for CryptoCompare & MJAC London Blockchain Summit

June 5, 2018

Showcasing pioneers, innovators and thought leaders of the blockchain industry.

 On the Main Stage, Zeeshan Feroz, CEO (UK) of Coinbase, will be presenting on Cryptocurrencies: Creating an Open Financial System; Danny Aranda, Managing Director of Strategic Growth at Ripple, will be discussing Blockchain and the Internet of Value; and Joshua Riddett, Founder & Managing Director of Easy Crypto Hunter will be examining crypto mining and asking: ‘Are Money Making Machines too Good to be True?’ Keynote speaker Chris Burniske, Co-founder of Placeholder Ventures, will present on Relative and Fundamental Valuation Approaches to Cryptoassets.

 The Main Stage will also host a number of panel discussions. Ruth Wandhöfer, Managing Director/Global Head of Regulatory & Market Strategy at Citi, will be joined by Simon Taylor, Co-founder and Blockchain Practice Lead at 11:FS, to discuss Regulating Cryptocurrencies; and Ryan Radloff, CEO of CoinShares (UK), will debate alongside investment expert Glen Goodman and Coinfloor’s Head of Liquidity, Mark Lamb, on The Future of Crypto Derivatives. Vitaliy Kedyk, Executive Director of CEX.IO; Stephan Tual, Founder of Atlas Neue; Edd Carlton, Head of OTC Trading at BlockEx, and Norbert Redkie, CEO and Founder of TRUST, make up the ‘Business Panel.’

 The ICO & Blockchain Stage – sponsored by HiP – will see discussions and presentations from companies including: Block Stocks, Elevate Group, BHB Network, HiP and Olshansky and Partners. Amanda Green and Jiří (George) Daniel of EY will be presenting their recent paper on Accounting for crypto-assets.

 Additionally over 30 eminent and emerging companies will be exhibiting. BP Prime is Gold Sponsor of the event, and the exclusive networking after party – open to all delegates – is sponsored by Laneaxis.

 Confirmed speakers:

 “We have a stellar line-up who will be covering everything from the basics of what blockchain technology is and how cryptocurrency exchanges and crypto wallets work to the minutiae of mining, ICOs and regulation,” said Michael Hannigan of MJAC. “This is a very forward-looking event so delegates will get insight on the most innovative companies within the blockchain space and will discover all there is to know about how the sector is evolving.”

 The CryptoCompare & MJAC London Blockchain Summit is taking place at Old Billingsgate, Wednesday, June 13th, 2018.

 About MJAC Disruptive Investment Conferences

 MJAC InvestorsHub Disruptive Investment Conferences are conferences and expos focusing on disruptive technologies including: blockchain, lithium and medical marijuana.

 About CryptoCompare

 CryptoCompare pride themselves in showing the most accurate live prices, charting and market analysis from 65 of the top crypto exchanges globally. Their content editors keep the mining data, be it company, mining equipment or mining contracts up to date with the latest pricing and products available on the market. CryptoCompare’s wallets section has a comprehensive list of wallets that will help find the best wallet for clients needs. They have over 217,663 trading pairs and over 4,688 crypto currencies or crypto assets in an easy to understand and intuitive format.


