Digital Leaders Announces the DL100 Finalists

May 15, 2017

UK wide list highlights the leading champions of digital transformation across industries. The public can now vote for the ultimate winners across a range of award categories. Notable names include fintech stars Monzo, the Manchester Robot Orchestra and Huddlestock  

 Digital Leaders, the global initiative for promoting effective, long-term digital transformation across government and industries, has today announced the finalists who make up the DL100 list for 2017 and opened the public vote.

 The independent list recognises 100 people and organisations across the UK who are leading the way in digital transformation in all sectors. Previously, the list has featured industry names such as: Martha Lane-Fox, Mike Bracken, Liam Maxwell, Kevin Cunnington and Eileen Burbidge.

 The 100 finalists that make up the list will now compete for the public vote in one of 10 categories. This year’s list is made up of individuals and organisations with 50 private sector, 29 from the public sector and 20 from the nonprofit sector.

 Leading by example, the DL100 list has a 50/50 gender split, recognising the diversity in digital transformation roles and the leading women across the industry. A figure not seen commonly on many industry lists.

 Nine UK regions are represented in this year’s list reflecting the national reach of the Digital Leaders Community. Outside of London and the South East, the strongest regions were Scotland, the North West, Yorkshire and Humberside, the South West and the East of England.

 Lord Francis Maude of Horsham, Chair of Digital Leaders, said:

 “The Digital Leaders 100 list 2017 is once again highlighting the progress that has been made in digitally transforming the UK across all sectors. Our Digital Leaders community have pulled out all the stops to let us know about the hidden heroes, quietly getting on with the UK’s digital transformation without themselves seeking recognition. It’s great to see such a strong list from outside London this year reflecting our own National programme and the growing importance that digital transformation has in organisations irrespective of size or sector.”

 Robin Knowles, CEO of Digital Leaders, commented: “We are once again proud to see the incredible recognition of leading female role models in the DL100. As a list that is nominated from our extensive Digital Leaders network, we’re always eager to see new names and faces featured on the list, and to have achieved such a diverse mix of names from all sectors is a huge achievement for the Digital Leaders community. There are few organisations that can claim they have successfully gathered a list with 50/50 representation! We’re extremely excited to see who comes out top in our public vote!”

 The most hotly contested category each year is the Digital Leader of the Year Category. Previous winners have included Martha Lane Fox, Maggie Philbin and Mike Bracken. This year’s list notably includes non-profit leaders including Asthma UK’s Kay Boycott, Helen Milner from The Good Things Foundation and Craig Steele from CoderDojo as well as leading innovators in Enterprise like Claire Calmejane from Lloyds Banking Group and Elizabeth Vega of Informed Solutions. From the Public Sector Mayank Prakash of DWP and Lisa Dawson of Newcastle City Council.

 Robin Knowles, CEO of Digital Leaders, added:

 “This is the annual list membership that money can’t buy. A truly independent list nominated by our growing community and shortlisted by 10 independent judges before a public vote puts them into order.

 Judges for the DL100 shortlist include:

 Lord Maude of Horsham – Chair

 Chris Yiu – Director, Uber

 Emma McGuigan – Global CTO, Accenture

 Jacqueline de Rojas – President, techUK

 Lesley Seary – CEO, LB Islington

 Maggie Philbin – CEO, Teentech

 Miguel Rodriguez-Solas – Independent

 Nick Williams, MD, Consumer Digital, Lloyds Banking Group

 Oliver Morley – CEO, DVLA

 Rachel Neaman – CEO, Corsham Institute

 Theo Blackwell – Lead Member for Digital, LB Camden

 The final list order and category winners will be announced at the DL100 Awards Dinner at St. Pancras Renaissance London Hotel on 22 June 2017.

 To vote in the DL100 and find out more, go to: digileaders100.com (Please note this website goes live on the evening of 9 May)


