Finance Montréal announces the creation of the Montréal FinTech Station

June 20, 2018

Finance Montréal is pleased to announce the creation of the Montréal FinTech Station thanks to financial support from the Government of Québec.

 The Montréal FinTech Station’s mission will be to support the development of new businesses in the financial technology sector as well as help major financial institutions with their digital transformation. This new physical space, which is set to open its doors in the fall of 2019, will be located at 4 Place Ville Marie. The Montréal FinTech Station will be headed by Matthieu Cardinal, Vice President, FinTech Development and Corporate Affairs, whose leadership contributed to the Canada FinTech Forum’s significant growth since its first edition in 2013.

 The Montréal FinTech Station’s initial surface area will be close to 25,000 square feet once construction is completed in 2019. The space is expected to accommodate 20 to 30 start-ups as well as several corporate partners. In the fall of 2018, activities such as conferences, workshops and targeted meetings with sector stakeholders will be launched. Some of these activities will take place at Espace CDPQ, located at Place Ville Marie.

 “We hope to make the Montréal FinTech Station a state-of-the-art space that is dialled in to the global trends revolutionising financial services. At the Station, financial sector players of all sizes will solve real business problems. Together, we will help create the financial solutions of tomorrow, to the benefit of companies and citizens,” said Matthieu Cardinal.

 “The Montréal FinTech Station will be Finance Montréal’s flagship project for years to come. It is the achievement of the team’s dedication, as well as the invaluable support of the Government of Québec, which believed in our vision and to which we owe a debt of gratitude. This project will make it possible to develop Québec’s FinTech community and help bolster Montréal’s position as an innovative financial hub,” added Louis Lévesque, Chief Executive Officer of Finance Montréal.

 “Technology occupies a central and growing place in the financial sector and in this context, it becomes essential to pool our forces around a dynamic and well structured pole in order to take advantage of the great expertise developed in the city, which attracts attention everywhere on the planet, especially when it comes to artificial intelligence. The impact will undoubtedly be significant for the Quebec financial sector and I would like to thank all the partners involved in the creation of the Montréal FinTech Station,” concluded the Québec Minister of Finance, M. Carlos J. Leitão.

 About Finance Montréal

 Created in 2010, Finance Montréal, Québec’s financial cluster, has a mission to make Montréal a world- class financial hub, and foster cooperation among its member institutions to accelerate the industry’s growth. The organisation engages in international business development activities to attract foreign financial companies to Montréal by promoting various tax incentives including the IFC tax credit. It also administers the Montréal FinTech Station, a development centre for businesses in the financial technology sector.


