Innovate Finance unveils finalists for 2018 FinTech Pitch360

February 15, 2018

Innovate Finance, the UK membership association that represents global FinTech, today announced the finalists for its 2018 Pitch360 FinTech competition. Pitch360, sponsored by Intel and hosted by Chris Denson of Innovation Crush, takes place on Tuesday 20th March during Innovate Finance’s flagship Global Summit in London’s Guildhall.

 Pitch360 will see finalists present their startup proposition for six minutes to a global audience and experienced judging panel. The overall winner of Pitch360 will receive prizes including a year’s membership to Innovate Finance, a £10,000 cash prize, expert policy and legal advice from Innovate Finance partners, PR advice and two tickets to Innovate Finance Global Summit 2019.

 Charlotte Crosswell, CEO of Innovate Finance, said: “Following the success of the inaugural competition last year, we are pleased to announce our 2018 finalists for Pitch360.  The competition is a fantastic platform for entrepreneurs to showcase their innovative products and solutions to leading industry figures, FinTech investors and a global audience. This year’s finalists highlight the talent and diversity in our sector and as FinTech goes from strength to strength, we look forward to seeing more  of these innovations challenge the status quo in financial services in 2018 and in the years to come.”

 Applications for the competition opened in October 2017 and finalists were selected by a committee of FinTech leaders.

 The 2018 Pitch360 finalists are as follows:

 The full list of category finalists will be released in the coming weeks.

 Judges confirmed for Pitch360 include Bipin Sahni – EVP, Head of Innovation and R&D, Innovation Group at Wells Fargo and Andrei Brasoveanu, Vice Presidentl at  Accel Partners.

 More judges will be announced ahead of the event.

 About Innovate Finance

 Innovate Finance is an independent membership association that represents the UK’s global FinTech community. Founded in 2014 with the support of the City of London and Canary Wharf Group, Innovate Finance is a not-for-profit with over 250+ members that aims to accelerate the country’s leading position in the global financial services sector by directly supporting the next era of technology-led financial services innovators, whether they be a young startup or an established industry player. This is achieved through curated programmes based on member requirements, policy working groups and promotion through global press and social media.  The goal is to create a single point of access across the sectors to help foster enabling policies, regulation, talent development, business growth opportunities and investment in the UK — and, most importantly, to create a global finance sector that offers services that are more sustainable, more inclusive and better for everyone.

 http://www.innovatefinance.com


