Digital Insurance Agenda 2017: Insurance at the brink of massive customer centric change

May 13, 2017

850 Decision makers of more than 250 companies representing 40 countries from all 6 continents turned the second edition of Digital Insurance Agenda (DIA) into a massive success. DIA, the largest ‘must see’ insurtech event worldwide took place at 10 and 11 May in Amsetrdam and set the stage for the most important digital developments in the years to come. More than 50 insurtechs presented solutions that will accelerate innovation in insurance. Technologies on stage varied from artificial intelligence and drones in P&C insurance to chatbots and connected devices in life and health.

 “The live demos at DIA Amsterdam definitely made clear that insurance is at the brink of massive customer centric change. Many of the insurtechs at DIA presented applications that enhance operational excellence as well as drive customer engagement”, says Reggy de Feniks, who founded DIA together with Roger Peverelli.

 “The DIA line-up and the response among the audience show that digital transformation is now mainstream, and artificial intelligence and machine learning are providing the next challenge”, summarizes Amir Tabakovic, Vice President Business Development at machine learning expert BigML, his impressions.

 “The most important challenge for incumbents however is not about technology but about cultural change”, said Mark Klein, Chief Digital Officer ERGO Group. Amélie Oudea Castera, CMO und Chief Digital Officer at AXA Group, confirmed this: “Insurance carriers have to change; and they will change. But this is not an easy process.”

 DIAmond Award winners
The many insurers and insurtech investors in the DIA audience awarded six insurtechs the DIAmond Award for insurtech with most strategic impact:

 In total more than 50 selected insurtechs from 6 continents presented their solutions at DIA Amsterdam; among others Abracar (Germany), Amodo (Croatia), BIMA (Sweden), Boundlss (Australia), Cytora (UK), Dacadoo (Switzerland), eSignLive (Canada), GetmeIns (Israel), Guardtime (Estonia), Kevinsured (Spain), NuvaLaw (South Africa), PolicyPal (Singapore), Qover (Belgium), Reply.ai (USA), RightIndem (UK), Skyglyph (Bulgaria), SnapSure and Kasko (Germany), Tribe (Norway) and Youse (Brazil).

 About DIA
DIA – Digital Insurance Agenda – is the leading worldwide conference for insurtech and innovation in insurance. The purpose of DIA is to accelerate innovation in insurance, by connecting insurance executives with insurtech leaders from all over the globe. DIA is an initiative of Reggy de Feniks, Roger Peverelli and Conny Dorrestijn. Peverelli and De Feniks are the authors of the worldwide bestseller Reinventing Financial Services and just launched Reinventing Customer Engagement. The next level of digital transformation for banks and insurers. Peverelli and De Feniks are listed in the global top 50 Insurtech Influencers. Dorrestijn is listed on the Women in Fintech 50. All three work more than 25 years in the financial services sector.

 Written by Roger Peverelli and Reggy de Feniks


