Max Polyakov’s Noosphere Backs drone-racing FAI World Cup with Copter Race

November 27, 2017

Dnipro recently hosted an FAI World Cup stage in the racing of drones with Copter Race, supported by Max Polyakov managing partner of Noosphere Ventures

 This year, Dnipro was included in the list of 16 cities worldwide to hold stages of FAI World Cup in the racing of drones. More than 40 pilots from different countries took part in the competition to win the Noosphere Race Cup, an integral part of Copter Race 2017. The event, hosted by a Noosphere NGO founded by Max Polyakov, also attracted crowds with spectacular flights of non-professional pilots, Freestyle and a colorful night show.

 On September 23-24, the Copter Race, traditionally organized by Noosphere, was extended with a stage of Drone Racing World Cup in the F3U class of the World Air Sports Federation. Although the world cup was held in Dnipro for the first time, the city welcomed more than 40 pilots from Switzerland, Germany, Poland, and Ukraine.

 Noosphere with Max Polyakov, its founder, hosted their first drone-related event in early 2015. Since then, Noosphere has held 5 major competitions for drone pilots. This year, Dnipro became one of the cities to host a stage of the FAI Drone Racing World Cup in the racing of drones. The event was judged by 2 experts from Italy and Ukraine.

 Drone racing remains to be one of the most promising and rapidly growing sports disciplines. Both the new rules and technical requirements are still being established.  Being a technical partner of FAI, Noosphere Ventures has been working hard to implement the newest regulatory tools and solutions in drone racing. According to Max Polyakov, this year Noosphere Ventures has successfully tested CupNavigator, the hi-tech scoring system that was used during the Race Cup of the World Cup stage of drone racing.

 Along with professional flights, the event also included an extremely entertaining Fan Сopter League and freestyle sessions for races between amateur pilots. The viewers were amazed with dive-bombers, loop de loops, back flips and stunts, as well as a luminous and bright night show of drones.

 The event, hosted by Noosphere of Max Polyakov, was not only about professional racing, but a pleasant family weekend, where everyone could try operating a real drone. The holiday included numerous exhibitions, workshops and game zones for kids and teens.

  


