Conferma and Concur Partner to Provide Virtual Card Solution

July 18, 2017

Conferma, a leading FinTech company specialising in virtual card technology has today announced a partnership with Concur, the world’s leading provider of integrated travel and expense management solutions and services.

 The Concur Conferma end-to-end integration will automatically deliver card details to hotels securely and electronically. The partnership will bring an integration of Conferma’s virtual payment solution into the Concur Travel and Expense platform offering a seamless process within existing workflows while providing controls around all aspects of travel purchasing. Travel managers now have the ability to increase flexible controls on travel policy and streamline budgeting, accounting and reconciliation.

 Additionally, when booking through Concur Travel, business travellers will now be able to pay using a virtual card integrated invisibly at the point of sale.Virtual cards are an increasingly popular commercial product revolutionising corporate payments with demand in the market showing staggering double-digit growth year over year¹.

 “Virtual cards give travelers greater flexibility and a seamless travel experience while providing travel program administrators and financial controllers a tool that increases security, fraud protection, and streamlined spend reconciliation,” said Doug Anderson, SVP Global Travel Products for Concur.

 “This partnership is another proof point of our continued effort to provide travel and expense solutions that give travel program managers efficient spend controls and unmatched visibility.”

 Simon Barker, CEO of Conferma, said: “We are extremely excited about partnering with Concur Travel. Concur’s customers can now benefit from the heightened levels of security and efficiency that the Conferma virtual card offering is able to provide. I believe that this partnership will drive additional value to both business and the wider travel community.”

 Concur’s partnership with Conferma will offer not only increased security, productivity and convenience to travellers and their employers, but it will also use Conferma’s secure email for communication of confidential booking details instead of the outdated and unprotected process of faxing. This offering will be available across the global Concur platform and Conferma’s worldwide network of banking partners.

 Banking Technology April 2017¹

 

 Media Contact: Vikki McCrindle – vikki@skyparlour.com


