Brickblock Puts Real Estate On The Blockchain For The First Time

October 12, 2017

October 12th, UK: Brickblock, the investment platform connecting real-world assets and cryptocurrencies, has added experienced property investor and developer Jeff Woodward to its team as Chief Investment Officer (CIO).

 Jeff’s career in real estate has spanned 25 years, during which he has secured investments totalling more than £700 million. His addition to the team will bring some exciting real estate projects onto the platform, including social housing. In December, Brickblock will complete a world-first by selling an entire apartment building on the blockchain.

 Brickblock is developing a platform that allows retail investors to diversify their crypto assets into real estate, real estate funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and passive and active coin funds without requiring them to exchange their money into fiat currency. This not only improves global access to real estate investment, but also greatly lowers cost barriers that would previously have prevented people from investing.

 “Marrying Jeff’s expertise with Brickblock’s aims and technology is hugely exciting for the world of real estate. We are totally reshaping how retail investment works; not only in how people invest in property, but the amount required to invest,” said Jakob Drzazga, co-founder of Brickblock. “The platform doesn’t have a minimum investment amount, and by using the blockchain and smart contracts, we can keep fees to a minimum. This will open up the world of real estate investing to people who previously wouldn’t have been able to participate.”

 Jeff Woodward, CIO at Brickblock, said: “Joining a team that is revolutionising the world of real estate and investing couldn’t be more exciting. For many, real estate investing and blockchain may seem too technical or out of reach, but through Brickblock and the blockchain, these are being simplified and opened up to a much wider audience.”

 http://www.brickblock.io/

 Press Contact: Jenny Corlett t: +44 (0) 20 7242 8867 | w: www.aspectuspr.com


