Fintech company Centtrip launches instant payments that will save companies time and money

May 9, 2018

Centtrip has launched a revolutionary payment service with the potential to save businesses substantial amounts of money and reduce transaction times to literally seconds.

 Centtrip now allows multi-national companies to make unlimited local and international payments in any 15 deposit currencies within seconds and free of charge, eradicating considerable costs and inefficiencies that typically accompany such transactions. It also helps businesses navigate currency fluctuations, frees them from the constraints of banking hours, time zones, payment caps and mitigates the risk of delayed or lost payments.

 Once a company has become a Centtrip client, our team of dedicated experts assess existing needs, operations and company structure to devise a strategy that will help them achieve their goals. In addition to the master account, the company can open sub-accounts for each regional division and cost centre. And with the PSD2-compliant technology, not only do CFOs and financial directors have access to efficient treasury management, but they also have total control of their company-wide finances. They can assign administrators and set up user permissions to simplify and tailor the Centtrip reporting feature across each sub-account and make individual and batch payments instantly and free of charge, managing all activity from the master account anywhere in the world.

 Without such a system, companies face lengthy and cumbersome processes, excessive waiting times and extortionate fees per transaction, as well as additional charges that are incorporated in the currency exchange spread. With CenttripNow, funds on any sub-account can be used for local and international payments, conversion of currencies and transfer of funds to and from associated multi-currency cards and Centtrip sub-accounts.

 Brian Jamieson, co-founder and CEO of Centtrip, said: “Our clients drive our development – we design all our products and services to meet their specific needs and help them achieve growth in a smarter and more cost-effective way. CenttripNow is no exception. Becoming a Centtrip client means you can connect across your business network more efficiently and forge stronger long-term relationships.

 “Last year, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney rightly identified the need to open up the UK payments system to fintech firms to boost innovation and competition in the sector. With CenttripNow and other innovative products and services, we are set to be at the forefront of this movement.”

 About Centtrip

 Established in 2014 by financial industry veterans, Centtrip has a multi-currency account, app and card, allowing corporates and affluent individuals to buy and sell currencies at live-market rates, send payments worldwide and manage expenses with its ground-breaking multi-currency Mastercard.

 Its app is built on safe, secure and regulated technology, allowing clients to keep track of their finances when on the move.

 Centtrip can create relevant and industry-specific products and services. The company has established a substantial and growing footprint in the international music and yachting sectors.

 Centtrip Limited is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) as an Electronic Money Institution (firm reference number 900717). The Centtrip Prepaid Mastercard is issued by Prepaid Financial Services Limited (PFS) pursuant to a licence from Mastercard International Incorporated. PFS is also authorised and regulated by the FCA as an Electronic Money institution (firm reference number 900036).


