Trak Global lands another technology award

June 7, 2017

Trak Global Group (TGG), the telematics technology company based in Crewe, has been recognised as one of the top five fastest growing technology companies in the North of England.

 Receiving the award last Thursday, Ed Rochfort, managing director of Carrot Insurance, which is part of TGG and provides telematics insurance to young people via black boxes and apps, said: “We’re delighted to feature on the first ever Northern Tech 100 league table, at number five among the 100 fastest growing tech companies.”

 In its submission, TGG underlined the continuing growth of its young driver propositions, both through Carrot and via strategic partnerships, including More Th>n Sm>rt Wheels, part of RSA Group. The company has also launched a world wide free-to-download app for business drivers, called ‘Appy Fleet,’ which aims to reduce the number of accidents among employees driving for business.Ed Rochfort said the group marked 2016 by launching in North America for the first time, and now exports its products to Canada, Spain and the Middle East. He said: “The UK has a strong record for road safety, and we are also one of the world leaders in telematics technology. Trak Global Group is part of a UK success story and we look forward to continuing our growth in both the UK and increasingly, abroad.” The Northern Tech 100 league table was sponsored by European technology investment bank GP Bullhound. The data compiled by GP Bullhound and Tech North has shown that the 100 fastest growing tech firms in the North generated over £1.9bn in revenue in 2016. About Trak Global GroupOperating in 5 countries, Trak Global Group is one of the world’s largest telematics companies, gathering and interpreting data from connected devices to help organisations manage driver and vehicle risk. To date, the company has gathered and interpreted data on over 500 million journeys, and received the Prince Michael International Road Safety Award in 2015 for its work in reducing young driver accident frequency. The business has long-standing partnerships with global insurers, leading motor manufacturers, corporate fleets and daily rental companies.

 For more information, please contact: Ben Welsh 07568 382040


