AI for Financial Industry: YUKKA Lab launches new Market Sentiment Analysis Tools

May 29, 2018

The YUKKA Lab News & Trend Lab are innovative Artificial Intelligence solutions that anticipate market trends by analysing financial news with the power of Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing.

 YUKKA Lab, the FinTech startup for Augmented Language Intelligence and context-based sentiment analysis for the financial industry, launches their News & Trend Lab. The News & Trend Lab is a web based application that offers an organised and efficient real-time overview of topics and trends in financial news.

 Visualisation of Sentiments and Early Warning

 The company‘s unique semantic text analysis technology automatically detects, interprets and evaluates news content in English and German in real time. It allows users to reliably anticipate market moods, opinions and trends and adjust strategies accordingly.

 Visualisation of Sentiments

 The product YUKKA News & Trend Lab offers a visualisation of sentiments in an intuitive cockpit-style interface, for efficient information processing and easy interpreting of complex contexts and relations between markets, companies and its stakeholders. Multiple search and filter options facilitate access to all relevant topics, news and sentiment trend changes in one screen from the ever-increasing mass of financial and business news.

 YUKKA Lab aggregates and analyses more than 200,000 articles per day from more than 20,000 global sources including established news agencies like dpa-AFX, The Guardian, Dow Jones Newswire, Nasdaq GlobeNewswire, Business Wire, awp and others.

 Early Warning System

 The YUKKA Trend Lab uses these sentiment scores and proprietary arithmetical financial models that have been back-tested since 2005 to generate an early warning system for trends and trend reversals in stock markets.

 Easy to understand and predictive insights for better informed decisions

 The YUKKA News & Trend Lab consists of two elements: The News Lab with focus on the presentation of market events, stakeholders and interrelationships, including the sentiments.  As well as the Trend Lab, which develops trend indicators and trading signals on the basis of self-developed financial models from the sentiments.

 Features include:

 About YUKKA Lab AG

 YUKKA Lab AG is in the field of Augmented Language Intelligence. Its unique semantic text analysis technology automatically interprets and evaluates news content in real time and allows users to reliably anticipate market opinions and trends and adjust strategies accordingly. YUKKA’s Augmented Language Intelligence can be applied to identify and precisely quantify the sentiment of the financial market for companies, sectors or indices on the basis of a large amount of news data analysed.

 YUKKA Lab’s solutions give professionals from asset management, market research, financial advisory, risk management and communication access to the benefits of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning and enable them to handle the rapidly increasing amount of various financial data in real-time and gain a competitive edge.

 YUKKA Lab AG was founded in 2014 in Berlin.


