VIPR Solutions Shares Best Practice Alongside Theresa May In The Parliamentary Review

September 27, 2017

VIPR Solutions is delighted to have appeared alongside Prime Minister Theresa May in The Parliamentary Review’s 2016/17 edition.

 The distinguished document highlights how sector leaders, such as VIPR, have responded to challenges in the UK’s political and economic environment, with its main aim to showcase best practice as a learning tool to the public and private sector.

 Discussing the evolution of the company and the modernisation of the insurance market, VIPR’s double-page feature was included in The Parliamentary Review’s finance issue. The article demonstrates how VIPR has solved widespread industry issues, such as how to deal with vast quantities of data with its sophisticated software solutions.

 Established by former minister The Rt Hon David Curry in 2010, The Parliamentary Review’s September release is now a key fixture in the political calendar and is sent to over half a million leading policymakers across all policy areas. The articles in the Review act as both a blueprint for success and a template for reform for several industries around the country.

 The Parliamentary Review’s director, Daniel Yossman, said, “VIPR Solutions and other hardworking organisations from across the UK have come together to make this year’s Review possible. Sharing knowledge and insight with both peers and government is essential work and I am delighted that this year’s Review will reach every corner of the British economy.”“

 We are thrilled to have been featured in this year’s Parliamentary Review and recognised for our contributions to insurers,” said VIPR’s Director, Richard Brown. “Having VIPR included in such a prominent publication is truly fantastic for the company. We will continue to offer ever more indispensable solutions to the insurance industry as they face ever-changing legislations and digital pressure.”

 Take a look at VIPR in The Parliamentary Review on pages 29 and 30 here.

 VIPR Solutions http://www.viprsolutions.com 

 


