New Senior Digital Appointment At Fintech Firm Quint

July 24, 2017

Fintech giant Quint Group has appointed a new acquisition manager as it continues its digital-led expansion in the consumer credit market. Digital marketing specialist Sangam Mishra joins Quint from fintech company Valour Group to head up the company’s paid channels and drive growth.  

 Sangam, 31, from Didsbury, brings 13 years of digital marketing experience into his new role, having occupied various roles at Valour Group after completing an MBA at Manchester Metropolitan University. Having started out in a compliance role at Valour Group, who owns consumer finance company Savvy.co.uk, Sangam worked his way up to become digital marketing manager.

 At Quint he will lead on paid activity across all the Group’s companies, optimising processes and driving growth across all channels. Quint owns and operates four mutually beneficial and strategically aligned financial technology businesses in the consumer credit sector including comparison site MoneyGuru.com which was launched last year.

 Sangam said: “Having been at my previous employer for nearly a decade I was ready for a new challenge and when I met the team at Quint it was clear that the company was a perfect fit for me. I am very familiar with the finance market in the North West and have been impressed by Quint and its recent growth.  “I’m enjoying my new role and working with the team who are all experts in their respective fields. My role is to optimise everything we do across all paid channels and ultimately improve conversions. I’m looking forward to getting to work on the different companies within the Group and contributing toward their success.”

 Founded in 2009, Quint now operates in UK, Poland, US and Australian territories and employs over 100 staff. Mike Ransom, managing director of Quint Group, added: “Sangam is very familiar with the market that we operate in and will bring a wide skill-set to our team. He brings great digital marketing experience in the consumer finance market and will be an important part of the growth across all channels for all of the Group’s companies. “It’s an exciting time for us having recently won a Queen’s Award for Innovation and we expect our turnover to exceed £50m in the current financial year.”

 Finlay Magowan Quint Group


