The Intercontinental Startup Battle / Silicon Valley to come back for the next round of competition

July 18, 2017

The Intercontinental Startup Battle, Silicon Valley sponsored by Startup.Network, is coming back this Fall for the next round of competition between the most promising and investment-attractive startups from Eastern Europe.

 A promised at the conclusion of the first Intercontinental Startup Battle, San Francisco on April 27th, we’re coming back this Fall for the next round of competition between the most promising and investment-attractive startups from Eastern Europe.

 The next  Intercontinental Startup Battle, Silicon Valley will take place on November 15th.

 We would like to point out that just as last time, the investment “casting” will be pretty tough. Therefore only future “unicorns” who will be able to pass the preliminary competitive selection will be allowed to participate in the event.

 If you’re interested in enrolling in the competition, please apply here.

 Don’t miss this opportunity to shine in front of private and corporate investors, representatives of local venture funds and investment banks, and leading private companies, who will all be in attendance among the guests of the Startup Battle.

 This is your chance to experience the Silicon Valley startup ecosystem, expand your network and make lots of useful connections!

 Intercontinental Startup Battle, Silicon Valley will be held in two stages:

 7:00 – 8:00 pm: Panel discussion.

 During this section the true sharks of the investment business and so called old-timers of the market will share their experience with their younger peers. They’ll speak about the latest trends, share their own experiences and knowledge, answer questions and advise participants on the further development of projects.

 8:00 – 8:15 pm: Break; “Be Aware Minutes”.

 08:15 pm – 09:30 pm: Startups Pitches.

 The second stage is devoted to presentations by entrepreneurs. Each founder will have 6 minutes: 3 minutes for a pitch and presentation, and another 3 minutes Q&A with experts and the audience.

 At the end of the event – “Be Aware Social Interactive”.

 Based on the results of Experts online voting, one startup will be chosen as a winner of the Intercontinental Startup Battle.

 We can’t wait to see you on November 15th, 2017, at 06:30 pm – 09:30 pm. at the 500Startups office

 (444 Castro Street, Mountain View, CA 94041 https://500.co/).

 Seats are limited, so please RSVP here to save a spot!.

 For those who are not able to join us in person, an online broadcast of Intercontinental Startup Battle, Silicon Valley will be available – keep an eye out for further announcements.

 The Intercontinental Startup Battle, Silicon Valley is going to be a part of 5-day business tour to  Silicon Valley. The whole programme you can find below:

 Startup Battle Tour Itinerary for participants:

 November 13th and14th – 2-Days of Investment Pitch bootcamp. Group and individual meetings with mentors and advisors from Silicon Valley.

 November 15th – Startup Battle

 November 16th, 17th – Tour of Silicon Valley (visiting iconic “Places of Power”, such as 500 Startups, HP Venture Fund, Facebook, Google, Apple, Almaz Capital, Plug and Play, and Stanford University, meeting real Silicon Valley inhabitants, expanding your network, soaking in the spirit of the entrepreneurship Mecca of the Hi-Tech world.

 The cost of participation for the full 5-Day programme (per person):

 The Participation fees do not include visa processing, air travel,  or lodgings.

 For more information, please contact Julia Smelaya, Event director at Startup.Network: ys@startup.ua 

 We are looking forward to an exciting, interesting and rewarding tour. Join now!

  

  


