Money2020: Vested Launches Custom Financial PR Skill For Amazon Alexa

October 23, 2017

Vested, the fastest growing public relations agency globally, at Money 20/20 Las Vegas announced the launch of the first news product on Amazon Alexa developed specifically for PR professionals in finance . Financial communications executives can now access Vested’s weekly newsletter, “Vested Suggested,” to keep up with their industry’s news on-demand through the device.

 Vested Suggested curates and analyzes stories that Vested clients and other users need to stay informed about the finance and fintech sectors. Vested, which specializes in financial communications, has put together an editorial team to aggregate and add context to breaking news.

 Brett Crosby, a co-founder of Google Analytics and now chief operating officer and co-founder of PeerStreet, a Vested client, said: “On-demand information is an increasingly valuable asset, and the companies that figure out how to deliver it for their clients faster will be the winners. This holds true in the service sector just as it does in the tech sector. With this move, Vested continues to demonstrate their innovation as well as their commitment to better supporting their clients.”

 “It’s great to have our content be made available to our clients on command,” said Dan Simon, Vested co-founder and CEO. “Our clients expect us to keep pace with the rapid news cycle and to communicate that news in real time. As a service-minded agency, we listen to our clients and deliver on their expectations. The Vested Suggested Alexa skill is the first step of delivering customized industry news and intelligence on a client-by-client basis.”

 

  

 About Vested

 Named the world’s fastest growing public relations agency, Vested is an integrated communications firm focused on the future of finance. Vested’s approach merges deep financial expertise with creativity to deliver award-winning, integrated campaigns for our global clienteles.

 Vested is a founding member of the Global Fintech PR Network and recently launched the industry’s first agency-run investment group, Vested Ventures. Learn more at www.fullyvested.com, or via Twitter or LinkedIn.

 Vested
Donya Hengehold, 314-276-4995
donya@dh-communications.com


