Mercia Technologies PLC’s Fund Management Subsidiaries Rebranding As Mercia Fund Managers

October 3, 2017

Mercia Technologies PLC, the national investment group focused on the funding and scaling of innovative technology businesses with high growth potential from the UK regions, is pleased to announce that it is rebranding its fund management subsidiaries, which include Enterprise Ventures and Mercia Fund Management, to Mercia Fund Managers.

 As part of the Mercia Group’s continued growth and development, the company has also relaunched its website with a new, refreshed look at www.merciatech.co.uk

 The new site includes comprehensive and interactive content about Mercia’s direct investment activity and that of its fund management subsidiaries which include Enterprise Ventures, EV Business Loans and Mercia Fund Management.

 Mark Payton, CEO of Mercia, said: “This is an exciting time for Mercia as we continue to scale the business and increase our funds under management. As a result of our rapid growth, we feel that now is the right time to bring the fund management subsidiaries under one brand. The Enterprise Ventures track record has been instrumental in getting us to where we are now and following an intensive period of integration, we are coming together under one identity.

 “The rebranding of our wholly owned fund management subsidiaries as ‘Mercia Fund Managers’ and the refresh of our website reflects how the Group has evolved with the combination of the Enterprise Ventures and Mercia teams. Our goal is to become the leading investment company in the UK and, with our team of experienced investment specialists at the heart of our business, this is very much an achievable target for us. If an adviser or company is looking for early stage venture, debt or growth capital, Mercia should be at the top of their list.”

 The Group has more than 400 businesses in its portfolio, a strong record including 11 IPOs, and manages in excess of £330.0milllion of third party funds including regular EIS capital raises. It is able to invest between £50,000 to £2.0million, as well as provision of scale up capital through Mercia Technologies PLC, which can invest up to £10.0million using its balance sheet capital.

 Since Mercia’s acquisition of Enterprise Ventures 18 months ago, the Group has continued to focus its efforts on building its regional presence across the UK. During that time, Mercia has been appointed to manage more than £108.0million of new venture capital and loan funds by the British Business Bank (through the Northern Powerhouse Investment Funds), it has opened new offices in Sheffield, Leeds and Birmingham and has successfully scaled the Group to more than 65 employees.

  

  

 For more information:  www.merciatech.co.uk

 Contact: Mercia’s Marketing Director, Katy Horrocks, on 0161 838 5200


