Fashion On Screen (FOS) opens fundraise for Shakespeare production via SyndicateRoom

November 6, 2017

Online investment platform SyndicateRoom today announces that UK film and entertainment company, Fashion On Screen (FOS), will be raising £1.5 million via its platform.  

 FOS is a film production company which aims to produce prestigious, inspiring, commercial films for a global market.It is raising funds for its first film, Will, which is based on the critically acclaimed novel by Christopher Rush.

 The film will begin production in Spring 2018 and is slated for theatrical release later in the year. The EIS (Enterprise Investment Scheme) qualifying funds from this raise will support a wider film production budget of £5 million.

 Will is based on the novel of the life of Shakespeare by Scottish author Rush and explores the famous playwright’s life, focusing on the events that shaped his genius, from love and sex to politics. It will be produced by Stephen Evans (Henry V, The Madness of King George, and Much Ado About Nothing). A cash investment of £450,000 into the film has already been confirmed by the prestigious Twickenham Film Studios, where the film will be made.

 “The UK film industry has had a real renaissance in recent years, with growth forecast at 3% annually over the next five years to make it worth £72 billion by 2021,” said Nevern Johns, Managing Director, Fashion On Screen. “This has fuelled Fashion On Screen’s growth ambition. It’s panning out to be an exciting year. Not only are we raising capital for the production of Will, but we also intend to list on Nasdaq Nordic at the beginning of next year. We’re thrilled to invite savvy investors to join us on this journey.”

 The company has an additional two films earmarked for production: REVolution, a story of British and American involvement in the legendary 1958 Cuban Grand Prix; and Pandamania, a family film featuring extraordinary new animatronics and effects.

 FOS intends to list on Nasdaq Nordic at the beginning of 2018. It is currently the home of 720 listed companies and is Nasdaq’s most active exchange in Europe, having raised €7.9 billion from 80 IPOs.

 “We’ve chosen Nasdaq Nordic to list Fashion On Screen because we intend to benefit from the global brand strength of the Nasdaq name as we build our company,” said Finance Director Paul Bickford. “As we move the company forwards in its ambitions of becoming a globally recognised film production company we will be seeking broader and deeper international investment in future films and our Nasdaq listing is sure to help in that respect.”

 “It’s fantastic to welcome Fashion On Screen to the SyndicateRoom platform,” commented Tom Britton, CTO and Co-founder. “We’re seeing a trend towards films being funded in this way and have had a number of productions raise funds with us, from Hollywood movies to British independents. It’s an exciting time for Fashion On Screen with a strong portfolio of films in the pipeline and we’re thrilled to connect them with the savvy investors that make up our network.”


