Ingenico and Pennies enable Brits to keep giving to charity in increasingly cashless society

May 1, 2017

Ingenico Group, the global leader in seamless payment, has partnered with Pennies to enable their digital charity box on its market-leading payment terminals, becoming a pioneer supporter and provider of digital donation solutions to small & medium-sized businesses.

 Pennies’ digital micro-donations are anonymous – personal data-free, quick, and a choice every time. The retailer chooses the charity that its customers can support. No data is collected, and there is no follow up; it really is about dropping a few pence in a charity box – but via a debit or credit card.

 According to a recent survey by Pennies, Brits prefer (70% of UK Consumers surveyed) to give to charity in small amounts on an ad-hoc basis, however, over a third of us (39%) now frequently leave the house with no cash.

 Ingenico Pennies-enabled payment devices are currently activated in over 3,000 terminals in the UK across merchants as wide ranging as David Lloyd Leisure through to Topps Tiles. With Ingenico’s expertise in remotely managing payment devices in the field, Pennies’ solution can be seamlessly deployed throughout the UK’s largest standalone payment terminal installed base, instantly providing merchants with the opportunity to raise funds for charity with an extra touch at the point of sale.

 Supporting donations in-store through standalone terminals, Ingenico and Pennies helped charities like British Heart Foundation, Macmillan Cancer Support and the Wilderness Foundation to reach people in their local stores; thus ensuring consumers can give generously when completing payment via the payment method most convenient to them.

 In October 2015, Topps Tiles introduced Pennies into its Ingenico payment terminals and the charity application is now available in 369 of its stores. With an average donation value of 34p, customers of Topps Tiles have raised over £96,000 for Macmillan Cancer Support. These funds will help Macmillan to ensure they can be there for people affected by cancer; support that can make all the difference to a family coping with and beyond the impact of cancer.

 Matthew Williams, CEO of Topps Tiles, added, “It has been hugely satisfying to invite our customers to be part of our long-term commitment to our chosen charity, Macmillan Cancer Support.

 “Our customers have been incredibly supportive and the numbers choosing to donate using Pennies on our Ingenico payment terminals has not only surpassed our expectations, but continues to grow. We are incredibly grateful to our customers for their generosity and proud to support Macmillan through Pennies.”

 Ian Benn, Managing Director, Ingenico Northern Europe, commented, “We’ve been working with Pennies since 2011 to make it easier for retailers to give their customers a quick and convenient way to donate to charity. Using our payment terminals, customers can choose to round up their bill in a shop or restaurant – it couldn’t be easier. Six years on, we’re proud to be the largest partner of standalone terminals for Pennies and we are excited about the future of the relationship as we look to develop the application on our new TETRA terminal range and our integrated payment solutions. This will start to drive the opportunity to make a difference in a growing number of businesses visited by consumers every day”

 Alison Hutchinson, CEO at Pennies, said: “The partnership with Ingenico – one of the earliest to take Pennies live – has helped us to expand the reach of ‘feel good giving’ across the UK. Giving a few pence to charity remains the nations’ favourite way to give – but with a third of us leaving the house frequently with no cash, consumers and charities are seeking new digital ways to raise vital funds. We look forward to unlocking more merchants through our partnership expansion with Ingenico to keep giving small change a big purpose.”

 Ingenico Group will be exhibiting on Stand 610, and Pennies at Stand 1700, at the Retail Business Technology Exhibition 2017 event at Olympia, London, from May 8th to 9th. Visit the stand to discuss items from this press release or anything else payments related.

 Giving small change a big purpose with Pennies (video)


