LHoFT, B-Hive and KPMG Luxembourg bring together global fintech hubs in Amsterdam to drive international collaboration

June 10, 2018

Following the signature of the Memorandum of Understanding between the LHoFT Foundation and B-Hive Belgium at the Paris Fintech Forum in January, the two innovation hubs have been proactively collaborating on initiatives in order to further advance across Europe for the benefit of the financial services industry. In their latest joint endeavor, the LHoFT and B-Hive hosted the first European ‘Fin & Tonic’ networking event alongside the Money 20/20 Europe conference, Europe’s pre-eminent Fintech conference, in Amsterdam on June 5th2018.

 This first European networking event provided an opportunity to meet and mingle with startups, financial services firms & innovation hubs from all over Europe. The LHoFT Foundation and B-Hive welcomed over 200 guests that included 12 fintech associations/hubs from across Europe including the Czech Fintech Association, Fintech Scotland, Paris Fintech Forum, Holland Fintech, Invest Lithuania, Fintech Belgium, Cyber Wales, Innsomnia Accelerator, Portugal Fintech, Fintech District Milan, Bahrain Fintech bay and Level 39.

 This event was also sponsored by KMPG Luxembourg, one of the 13 private sector partners on the board of the LHoFT Foundation.

 Nasir Zubairi, CEO of the LHoFT commented: “Innovation in the financial services industry will move forward by us all working together, leveraging all our strengths and networks. Our bond with our neighbor in Belgium, B-hive, is strong and we see the benefits of what our collaboration can achieve. Events such as this aim to bring together more hubs and fintech stakeholders to get to know each other, discuss, find areas of mutual opportunity and cement new partnerships.” 

 Ellen Thijs, Executive business manager of B-Hive added:“Knowing the right contact person in each European region is crucial in exploring the right business opportunities. Only then the most optimal matchmaking and knowledge sharing can lead to co-creation; putting new business models, products or services on the market. In addition, it is important for the EU hubs to create 1 network when reaching out to other global regions like Bahrain, US, Singapore and Australia. B-Hive’s core mission is to connect the dots in Finance on an European scale and from there, connect to the other regions. This first EU meet up proves we are succeeding in reaching our goals.”

 Emilie Prodent-Pindor, Senior Manager at KPMG Luxembourg concluded: “At the Khube, the hub for innovation and entrepreneurship of KPMG Luxembourg, our aim is to connect the start-ups world with KPMG’s clients. We are part of an international network of fintech hubs and aim at accompanying our global clients in a very fast changing environment. It is very important for us to be well connected to the startup ecosystem and we are really proud to sponsor this event with the LHoFT and B-Hive. It is a perfect opportunity to reinforce our connections with Europeans hubs, meet startups, contribute to the dynamism of the financial services sector and make things happen.”


