One in Four Staff Set to Receive a Pay Rise

April 5, 2018

Research by recruitment specialist Robert Half UK reveals that on average, UK business leaders expect to give a pay rise to just one in four (26%) employees. One in 10 (11%) won’t be considered for an increase, while the remaining two-thirds (63%) face an uncertain future when it comes to their salary prospects.

 Financial pressures are cited by more than half (56%) as the reason behind stagnant wages. This echoes gloomy growth projections for the UK economy with many (44%) also claiming they believe they already pay their employees a fair wage that is in line with current market rates.

 These reservations to increase pay could undermine firms’ ability to retain staff in a highly competitive market – particularly when only a third (36%) of business leaders regularly offer their employees salary review discussions.

 Matt Weston, Managing Director at Robert Half UK said: “Salary typically isn’t the only motivation for an employee deciding if they should look for a new job; however, it can be key contributing factor. Opportunities to learn, feel valued, and gain additional responsibilities are all factors employees’ consider when deciding their next career move. The lesson here for business leaders is to ensure that current staff are offered these opportunities, or they will look for greener pastures – often with competitors.

 “If unable to provide a raise, business leaders should sit down with their employees to discuss alternative ways to reward performance. Some common options include additional annual leave, flexible benefits or a performance-based bonus.”  

 Research methodology

 The study was developed by Robert Half and conducted in December 2017 – January 2018 by an independent research firm among 500 senior decision-makers in businesses in the UK. This survey is part of an international study on hiring trends and career ambitions in the modern workplace.

 About Robert Half

 Robert Half is the world’s first and largest specialised recruitment consultancy and member of the S&P 500. Founded in 1948, the company has over 300 offices worldwide providing temporary, interim and permanent recruitment solutions for accounting and finance, financial services, technology, creative and administrative professionals.


