Narrative Science Turns Business Intel Into Data-Driven Stories

May 10, 2016

With the launch of Narratives for Power BI, Narrative Science unveils the latest integration of its advanced natural language generation (NLG) technology. The new extension, developed in collaboration with Microsoft, will give Microsoft Power BI users advanced analytics and data visualization tools that can help them read and understand corporate data.

 “Integrating Advanced NLG into Microsoft Power BI enables our customers to automatically turn complex data into insightful stories,” Microsoft Power BI General Manager Nick Caldwell said. Both companies also emphasized the importance of making technologies like advanced NLG accessible to the business user. This, according to Narrative Science CEO Stuart Frankel, is key to “maximiz(ing) the value of their business intelligence efforts.”

 “Put simply, this collaboration not only enhances and amplifies the user experience for customers of Power BI,” Frankel wrote in a blog post about the launch, “but also further drives the democratization of information, where users don’t need to interpret data and visualizations – they simply need to read.” Microsoft Power BI has more than 5 million users and works with Adobe Analytics, Github, Salesforce, and more than 50 other data sources.

 Narratives for Power BI is the second major new innovation from Narrative Science this year. In January, Narrative Science launched Narratives for Qlik, bringing its advanced NLG technology to the Pennsylvania-based company’s visual analytics and business intelligence platform. Narrative Science was featured in Forbes earlier this month, and in the New York Times in February. The company has raised more than $29 million in funding; most recently picking up $10 million in a round led by USAA.

 Founded in 2010 and headquartered in Chicago, Illinois, Narrative Science demoed Quill Financial at FinovateFall 2013.
The article was originally posted on Finovate Blog.


