Brickblock Announces Key Advisors

October 4, 2017

September 4th, 2017, Gibraltar: Brickblock, the platform for cryptocurrency holders to invest in real estate, ETFs and crypto funds, has secured three new high-profile advisors to add to its expert team. The new faces are: Holger Schlünzen, ETF analyst, Axel von Goldbeck, real estate and regulatory expert, and legal and currency specialist, Dr. Wolfgang Richter.

 Brickblock, which recently completed a $1m token sale in preparation for its ICO next month, is developing a platform which will allow people to invest cryptocurrency directly into real-world assets such as ETFs and real estate, as well as crypto-funds. This not only helps investors to manage the volatility of cryptocurrency, but also breaks down many of the barriers that currently prevent wider engagement with the financial markets.

 Holger’s ETF expertise, built through his experience at a specialist brokerage firm at which he selects and trades ETFs for institutional clients and pension funds, will be invaluable as Brickblock develops its relationships with brokers.

 Axel is a German lawyer and partner at the international law firm DWF with deep experience of the regulatory framework of the real estate industry. From 2008 to 2014 he worked as managing director for the German Property Association (Zentraler Immobilien Ausschuss), representing major German real estate fund managers. With this background, he will support Brickblock as it secures the required regulatory approvals.

 Dr. Wolfgang has a parallel focus on legal and economic issues, and more recently, on blockchain and cryptocurrencies. As a partner of DWF, and with experience from a boutique investment bank, he is perfectly positioned to apply his knowledge to Brickblock’s tokenisation of real estate and ETFs.

 Brickblock’s co-founder, Martin Mischke, commented: “There’s a real buzz and sense of momentum at Brickblock at the moment, coming off the back of our token sale and looking towards our ICO in October. We are delighted that such eminent specialists in their respective fields see the potential in Brickblock, and their expertise will enable us to accelerate our journey.”

 Holger, Alex and Wolfgang join an already strong advisory group for Brickblock, which comprises payments expert, Vincent Power, Moritz Hahn, supporting management and growth, smart contracts specialist, Simon Kufeld, and developer, Dimitry Medvedev.

 About Brickblock

 Co-founded by Jakob Drzazga and Martin Mischke, Brickblock is the first platform to connect real-world assets and cryptocurrencies. Built on the Ethereum blockchain, Brickblock allows holders of cryptocurrencies to invest in real estate and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) without requiring them to exchange their digital asset into fiat currency. The platform also enables direct investment into both active and passive cryptocurrency funds.

 http://www.brickblock.io/

 Press Contact: Jenny Corlett t: +44 (0) 20 7242 8867 | w: www.aspectuspr.com


