Creditspring raises £2 million investment and establishes an advisory board

December 31, 2017

Creditspring, the innovative consumer credit start-up, has taken steps forward in its mission to give people access to the credit. A successful investment round has yielded £2 million for product development, team expansion and market launch, with lead investor and BDT Capital veteran Chip Dunn becoming Non-Executive Chairman of the Board.

 At the same time, Creditspring has secured a new advisory board with the expertise of fintech entrepreneur Brian Norton, MIT microeconomics professor Parag Pathak and Credit Suisse Managing Director Jason Wortendyke.

 Creditspring was founded by Neil Kadagathur and Aravind Chandrasekaran based on the conviction that the overpriced and overcomplicated consumer credit market in the UK was leaving too many people on a financial knife-edge, one micro-crisis away from disaster. Drawing on their own experiences in the financial industry, having between them worked for names such as Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and Deutsche Bank, they set out to give people the credit they deserve: simpler, safer, cheaper.

 Chip Dunn brings more than 22 years of experience in principal investing, M&A and strategic advisory. As lead investor and Non-Executive Chairman of the Board, he will be closely involved with the business as it develops.

 On the advisory board, Creditspring welcomes:

 Creditspring has applied to the FCA for full permission for consumer credit, with plans to release more details and launch their first product in early 2018.

 “We’re creating a completely new way for people who want to take control of their financial wellbeing and protect themselves from unexpected shocks,” says Aravind. “We wish we could disclose more, but suffice to say this investment of capital and market experience is a huge step towards that goal.”

 About Creditspring

 Creditspring is creating a new approach to personal finance that gives people back control and peace of mind, protects them from the unexpected and provides an alternative to dangerous debt.


