Money20/20 Europe announces move for 2018 to Amsterdam

June 22, 2017

Ascential plc (LSE: ASCL.L), the global, business-to-business information company, today announces that Money20/20 Europe, its leading pan-European FinTech event, will move venue to the Rai in Amsterdam, in June 2018. 

 Money20/20 Europe launched in 2016, attracting just under 4,000 attendees to the Bella Center in Copenhagen. Its second edition, also at the Bella Center, will take place on 26-28 June 2017 before making the move to the larger Rai in Amsterdam for the third edition on 4-6 June 2018. 

 Ascential, owners of Money20/20, held a Europe-wide search to find the right location for both the event’s growth profile but also a location that fitted with the payments and financial services industry. The Rai and Amsterdam stood out as the ideal location for the next phase of Money20/20’2 growth.

 Tracey Davies, Managing Director of Money20/20 said, “We are delighted to make the move to the Rai, Amsterdam. It gives us the space we need to support the growth of Money20/20 Europe for the coming years.  We have had an incredible time building the event in Copenhagen and we have loved working with the teams at the Bella Center and Wonderful Copenhagen, but this is a key move for us to accommodate the thousands of delegates, partners and hundreds of exhibitors who see this event as the essential date in their diaries.”

 The Amsterdam payments and financial services community have given this move a very warm welcome including UL, Rabobank, Five Degrees and Holland Fintech. 

 “We’re delighted that Money20/20 Europe is coming to Amsterdam next year. It’s one of the leading innovation and FinTech conferences and we think they make a perfect match with our highly innovative and startup-friendly capital. I’m sure the presence of the conference will have a positive impact on making Amsterdam an increasingly important FinTech hub internationally. With innovation at the core of everything we do, at ING we have been supporting Money20/20 for years already and will continue to do so,” said Ralph Hamers, CEO of ING Group.

 “The importance of FinTech for the future of financial services can no longer be denied. As chairman of the Financial and Professional Services cluster of the Amsterdam Economic Board, I am delighted that Money20/20 Europe will move to Amsterdam. To me, Amsterdam combines the rich heritage of financial services with a creative and international mindset: an excellent choice,” said Marcel van Loo, EMEIA Financial Services Regional Managing Partner for EY.

 Constantijn van Oranje, Special Envoy of StartupDelta, said, “We are very pleased that Money20/20 Europe has chosen Amsterdam as location for its 2018 conference. With its booming FinTech and established financial scene Amsterdam can offer a great platform for matchmaking and innovation. Together with Money20/20 we can speed things up and show the world what the Netherlands has to offer in FinTech solutions.”

 Kajsa Ollongren, Deputy Mayor of Amsterdam, said, “Money20/20 Europe will bring tech and the financial sector together, two important industries for Amsterdam. Our city has long been a pioneer in financial innovation and that tradition is still thriving as we are quickly developing into one of the world’s leading hubs for FinTech. I feel confident that the companies, talent and innovators that will attend Money20/20 Europe will further boost that development.”

 Tracey Davies added, “This is an exciting time. In a matter of days the second Money20/20 Europe will take place and we are looking forward to welcoming even more delegates and sponsors than our launch show just over 12 months ago. We have an exciting line up with more than 100 sessions with 380+ speakers plus 20 keynotes including CEO & Founder of Square and Twitter, Jack Dorsey; Founder and CEO of Rocket Internet, Oliver Samwer; CEO of BBVA, Carlos Torres Vila; and President and Head of Solutions Business of Samsung SDS, Dr Won-Pyo Hong.”


