REALISTO Announces ICO To Launch Global Crowdfunded Real Estate Investment Marketplace

October 30, 2017

Berlin, Germany — October 30, 2017 — REALISTO, a Berlin-based decentralized real estate investing marketplace, has officially announced its November 7 ICO pre-sale and November 15 ICO, which will last one month through December 15.

 REALISTO’s blockchain-based platform bridges the gap between real estate experts and investors by giving experts a chance to tokenize projects and crowdfund capital from investors around the world, both casual and professional.The two-sided marketplace will initially launch with curated Berlin properties selected by REALISTO’s team of local real estate experts.

 These projects will be tokenized, added to REALISTO’s platform and then crowdfunded, providing both sponsors and investors a platform to foster projects globally. ICO participants can contribute Ethereum (ETH) and Bitcoin (BTC) to acquire REALISTO tokens (REA) to be used in active real estate investments.

 REALISTO Co-CEO, Rouven Rosenbaum, explains, “The inspiration behind REALISTO was to create access to investment opportunities that have so far been fraught with danger and inefficiency for the individual investor. Additionally, it is our goal to provide a stable and reliable platform for real estate experts to capitalize their projects. With REALISTO, you can select what project to invest in, manage your investment on our app, track real-world market value, and then receive proportional returns.”

 2018 Product Roadmap Includes Global Expansion and Security

 REALISTO ICO funds will be used to implement a transparent and fraud-proof trustee-wallet system that will make misappropriation and misuse of funds impossible. A Data Room will also be provided for investors to view bank protocols and fund activity.

 Leonard Zobel, REALISTO Co-Founder, states, “This secure system will be different than conventional real estate investment funds and other ICOs that offer asset-backed tokens. We will use a rigorous system of checks and balances that guarantee the safety of international investors who take a leap of faith and invest in global projects.”

 REALISTO will also be expanding globally with projects ranging from commercial spaces to small residential objects, with a carefully curated portfolio mixed with various project types that cater to different investment goals, yield-to-risk ratios, budgets, and more.

 All projects will be featured on REALISTO’s mobile application that is built on the Ethereum Blockchain, with full-functionality to search and invest in selected projects.

 REALISTO ICO Schedule (November 7 – December 15)

 The pre-sale and ICO dates listed will occur at 12:00 (UTC) and will be open to Ethereum (ETH) and Bitcoin (BTC) contributions:

 November 7: Hard-cap pre-sale with 30% bonus begins

 November 15: ICO begins (no hard-cap)

 November 15 – 22: 15% bonus period

 November 23 – November 30: 10% bonus period

 December 1 – December 7: 5% bonus period

 December 15: ICO ends

 About REALISTO:

 Founded in 2015, REALISTO is a decentralized, global platform dedicated to crowdfunding the world’s best real estate opportunities. Using blockchain technology, the REALISTO platform allows real estate experts to present unique projects, tokenize them, and offer them as curated investment opportunities.

 From rental properties to new developments, tokenized investments will be governed by an escrow-backed trust, providing security to high-yield investment projects.

 Because there is no minimum or maximum investment requirement, investors can choose which projects to participate in and how much to invest.

 REALISTO was founded in Berlin by two real estate professionals with hundreds of successful real estate transactions in the Berlin market.

 Website: www.realisto.io

 Whitepaper: REALISTO Whitepaper

 Press Contact: jared@cryptomediagroup.com


