REED SMITH RELEASES COMPREHENSIVE UPDATE OF BLOCKCHAIN LANDSCAPE

March 5, 2018

Reed Smith, a global law firm, today released an in-depth white paper on the global legal landscape impacting blockchain technology.

 Created by the firm’s FinTech team, the substantive publication – Blockchain – Distributed ledger technology and designing the future – focuses on numerous applications of blockchain technology across a variety of industries, including the rapidly developing cryptocurrency /digital token arena spurred by Bitcoin’s launch nearly a decade ago.  The white paper also addresses the rapidly evolving legal and regulatory landscape that has proliferated in response.

 “It is no surprise the digital currency ecosystem created by Bitcoin and its progeny has been rapidly followed by legislation and regulatory activity at every level of government,” said Sandy Thomas, Reed Smith’s Global Managing Partner.  “Navigating this complex legal landscape is nearly impossible without a firm grasp on its terrain and an easy-to-understand roadmap – both of which Blockchain delivers in a clear and comprehensive fashion.  We believe this resource will help businesses stay ahead of the regulatory curve as this technology continues to develop and proliferate.”

 The publication’s brief “Forward,” authored by Amy Davine Kim, the Chamber of Digital Commerce’s Global Policy Director and General Counsel, characterizes the white paperBlockchain as a “comprehensive compendium . . . laying out the foundation for regulatory oversight and then diving into specific use cases and geographies to help guide [companies in the blockchain space] to success in a regulated environment.”

 Reed Smith’s FinTech leaders, counsel Kari S. Larsen and partner Herbert F. Kozlov, oversaw the work of the firm’s global FinTech team in creating the 107-page report.

 “We are confident Blockchain will bring clarity to areas of the emerging digital token economy that have been evolving since the Bitcoin white paper appeared in 2008,” said Larsen. “Our team has created a report that is current and imminently useful for participants across every sector, at any scale.”

 Kozlov added, “The white paper provides an in-depth analysis of this growing technology opportunity and examines multiple use-cases. It is a useful tool for those already participating in this space, as well as for readers who want to explore and learn more about blockchain technology.  Our white paper addresses the way in which blockchain technology may rapidly impact, or even transform, businesses and operations.”

 Blockchain’s 12 chapters provide a depth of information to help businesses and organizations initiate or expand their relationships with digital currencies and digital ledger technology (DLT). Their contents include:

 The white paper concludes with a glossary defining several dozen terms and phrases commonly used in Bitcoin, blockchain, and distributed ledger technology legislation, regulations, and media, including blockchain, merkle tree, hard fork, cypherpunk, hot storage, hash, Byzantine Generals Problem, nonce, and Sybil attack.

 Blockchain – Distributed ledger technology and designing the future is now available here.


