Andrew Zimine – Keynote Speaker At International Payment Forum In Vienna

October 18, 2017

We are excited to announce the second Andrew Zimine’s speech in a cycle devoted to the hottest trends in fintech and cryptocurrency!

 On November, 23 Andrew will make a speech at the Vienna International Payment Forum, focusing on EON blockchain as a particular case in terms of transactional business and regulation. The International Payment Forum will be held on the 23-24th of November in the Fleming’s Conference Hotel in Vienna, Austria.

 This important fintech event will focus on how companies today are preparing for the new European Regulations and such hot topics in the payment market like instant payments, blockchain, fintech, cybersecurity and many others that will be impacting the payment industry in 2018.

 Andrew Zimine will talk about EON blockchain as a particular case in terms of transactional business and regulation. Although blockchain technology revolutionised the basis of transactional applications, providing authenticity and data safety, its regulation is still a serious problem. Andrew will show how EON platform not only allows to make fast and safe transactions, but also solves the question in terms of regulation.

 Andrew Zimine is CEO and Founder of innovative financial ecosystem Exscudo, the Owner and CEO of Clarus, a major developer of exchange systems and security and ERP-systems for companies. He is a consulting expert on DAPS Ethereum and advises major European and Asian financial market players on cryptocurrency trading.

 A recognized expert on blockchain technologies and decentralized cryptographic data transfer networks, Andrew has over 8 years of experience in the management of companies and over 18 years of experience in IT technologies and their integration into the real sector of economy.

 Please, do not hesitate to contact us to arrange meetings! Drop your e-mails to igoncharova@exscudo.com

 More Information: https://exscudo.com/


