“INSTANTT” WINS TOP TWO INDUSTRY AWARDS

December 5, 2017

Instantt, an innovative food ordering mobile app with a mission to end queuing for its rapidly growing user base, wins top two industry awards. It won in two categories, ‘UK Food & Drinks App of the year’ and ‘UK Retail & Shopping App of the year’ while being nominated for a third ‘UK Productivity App of the year’.

 

 On receiving the awards, Vikas Sharma, Founder & CEO, said, “We are only just getting started but were competing against some huge established brands with multi-million pound budgets. So this is a huge validation of our efforts and vision. It lays a solid foundation for a long and exciting journey ahead.”

 At its core Instantt believes in empowering its users by enabling them to make the most out of their time by engineering an intuitive, user-friendly technology to search for, order and queue-skip the best local food in London.

 As the world goes digital and with the average UK lunchbreak standing at just 20-minutes, Instantt doesn’t believe people should have to ‘physically’ queue for anything. Once an order is made, Instantt joins the queue and gives users an ‘instantt’ real-time ETA. Its uniquely optimised dashboard incorporates a fitbit step emulator to calculate how many steps a user will need to walk when picking up their order, providing an even more precise order-ahead service. Push-notifications will alert users when the app is minimised.

 Available on the App Store & Google Play, Instantt makes use of the latest GPS innovations to locate the phones nearest merchants; and through machine-learning integration technology will curate local services to allow its customers to discover the best premium food around them.

 Instantt’s recommendation service is perceptive and quickly adapts to the tastes and habits of its users. The app caters to all dietary requirements and will never suggest something outside of the user’s prerequisites. To ensure a smooth service, Instantt works closely with each restaurant when on-boarding a menu and through close collaboration can uniquely offer a customisable order-ahead system in fewer than two clicks.

 Instantt also stamps out the need for customers to waste time with cash, offering secure in-app purchasing, as well as a credit system to reward its loyal users (“iCredits”). Furthermore, Instantt’s newly launched web ordering service also allows its customers to easily order from their desktops via: https://order.instantt.co

 Instantt looks to attract tens of thousands of new users and to partner with hundreds of restaurants across London by early 2018. It’s in talks with a number of leading restaurants at Westfield Stratford, Brent Cross Shopping Centre, as well as various Hotel chains and Stadiums across London.

 Vikas Sharma, Instantt founder & CEO: “People hate to queue and so do we! We believe Instantt can solve this problem by providing a unique and intuitive service that empowers people to easily order the best in fresh food on-the-go. We get a real buzz knowing that we have users picking up their morning coffee while on their way to work without wasting a minute in a queue.”

 ABOUT INSTANTT

 

 Instantt is a mobile order-ahead food app and web service designed to offer fresh, healthy and hot food to London… without all the queuing or waiting. Founded by Vikas Sharma in 2015, Instantt partners with premium restaurants and leading venues around the city to provide a unique experience to its time-poor customers. Instantt is available now on the App Store & Google Play.

 UK App Awards 2017 Winners

 Youtube, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram


