SAXO PAYMENTS BANKING CIRCLE SUPPORTS MERGING PAYMENTS ASSOCIATION NEW MEMBERSHIP FOR EARLY STAGE FINTECHS

November 14, 2017

London, 14th November 2017 – The Emerging Payments Association (EPA), with the support of its Benefactor, Saxo Payments Banking Circle, has launched a new membership category called EPA ScaleUp Membership for early stage FinTech and PayTech companies.

 This three-year membership package is designed for ambitious FinTech companies with limited budgets who are looking to grow their businesses and innovate more effectively. EPA ScaleUp Membership enables FinTech companies wanting to participate in the emerging payments community to access the UK’s leading community of payments influencers and thought leaders. Members will receive special services tailored exclusively for early stage businesses to accelerate their growth, and will be able to take advantage of the EPA’s network of payments prospects, partners and suppliers at a subsidised membership rate for the first two years.

 To be an EPA ScaleUp Member, a start-up must meet the following criteria:

 “The UK is terrific at starting FinTechs. Now we’re helping them scale up. Our community is supporting its newest FinTech players and we’re proud to provide a full EPA growth service, tailored for smaller firms, at only 25 % of the normal price,” says Tony Craddock, Director General of the EPA.

 Craddock continues, “This is clear evidence that our community promotes competition. We’re de-risking growth in a market where open banking and PSD2 are creating opportunities for agile, innovative players – like our EPA ScaleUp members – to thrive.”

 Anders la Cour, CEO of Saxo Payments Banking Circle, and EPA Advisory Board member, states: “We’re at a critical juncture in terms of growth in the emerging payments sector and it’s crucial that everything possible is done to help businesses wanting to enter this marketplace. Membership of EPA ScaleUp will be hugely beneficial to businesses of all sizes, removing many of the most substantial barriers to international trade.

 “Banking Circle is helping to deliver a FinTech Regulation Helpline service to help FinTechs navigate new payments-related regulations. To provide essential support for start-ups, Banking Circle is also offering a special rate for international fund transfers for EPA Fintech ScaleUp members.

 “We are excited to be involved in the project from such an early stage, and believe that by becoming a benefactor of Project International Trade, Banking Circle can play a crucial role in empowering businesses to trade cross-border without barriers.”

 About the Emerging Payments Association

 The Emerging Payments Association (EPA) connects the payments ecosystem, encourages innovation and drives profitable business growth. Our goals are to strengthen and expand the payments industry to benefit all stakeholders.

 We achieve this by shaping a comprehensive programme of activities for our members with help from an independent board, which addresses key issues impacting the industry.

 These include:

 The EPA is over 120 members strong and growing. Our members come from across the payments value chain; including payments schemes, banks and issuers, merchant acquirers, PSPs, retailers, and more. These companies have come together, from across the UK and internationally, to join our association, collaborate, and speak with a unified voice.

 Want to find out more about membership?
Get in touch with Keri to find out more about becoming a member: keri.farrell@emergingpayments.org

 About Saxo Payments Banking Circle
In 2013 Saxo Bank formed a new entity, Saxo Payments A/S, with the purpose of using Saxo Bank’s core capabilities within the non-cash payments market. In October 2015 the company launched the Banking Circle – its grounbreaking product for payments and FX to the Financial Tech industry. In October 2017, the company launched its new identity for the Banking Circle, to reflect its position as a financial utility within core banking.

 Domiciled  in the European Union, Saxo Payments specialises in providing global payment account transactions and foreign exchange services to financial institutions, including FinTechs, banks, acquirers, payment service providers, FX brokers, money transfer businesses, e-wallets, and alternative payment providers. Saxo Payments is a Saxo Group company.

 For further information and interviews please contact the Saxo Payments Banking Circle Press Office: 
Wendy Harrison/Parm Heer – Harrison Sadler
T: 0208 977 9132
E: bankingcircle@harrisonsadler.com


