Anarchy, Blockchain and Utopia

April 2, 2018

Europe’s first peer reviewed journal dedicated to blockchain publishes its first article.

 The Journal of the British Blockchain Association (JBBA), Europe’s first peer reviewed journal dedicated to blockchain, publishes its first double blind peer reviewed article: Anarchy, Blockchain and Utopia: A theory of political-socioeconomic systems organised using Blockchain, by Brendan Markey-Towler.

 The article investigates the dynamics of a utopian society in which political-socioeconomic systems are organised using the blockchain technology.

 It highlights what many ‘blockchainers’ already hope to achieve out of the technology in areas such as healthcare, education and welfare and challenges government to implement blockchain more widely in order to support an ever-evolving society.

 The JBBA is Europe’s first peer reviewed journal devoted to Blockchain Technology and provides a platform for the academics, researchers, venture capitalists, investors, and other professionals to contribute to the recent advancements in the field of Distributed Ledger Technologies.

 Author Brendan Markey-Towler says:

 “The JBBA has given me a unique opportunity to publish my work in a peer-reviewed, open access, interdisciplinary journal dedicated to the study of of an exciting and emerging technology.”

 According to Professor David Lee Chuen, Associate Editor-in-Chief:

 “It is my hope that JBBA will attract more technical and non-technical research papers that discuss how and what blockchain delivers and achieves, especially in terms of creating new business models, altering the market structure, changing the structure of the society and being a driver for the fourth industrial revolution.”

 The Editor-in-Chief Dr Naseem Naqvi reports:

 “The JBBA provides a forum for authors to share their knowledge, skills and experiences across a wide range of industries and technologies in which blockchain is being deployed.

 “I am delighted to see that the journal has already started attracting high quality manuscripts. I would like to congratulate all the authors that are submitting their work to the journal. The JBBA is setting a precedent by becoming a global platform for authors to showcase their work related to blockchain and other distributed ledger technologies. Our mission is to make JBBA the ‘gold standard’ for high quality, evidence based portal in blockchain. The journal will serve the need of evolving population of blockchain professionals  while promoting global collaboration. The journal is backed by a strong and diverse editorial board of scholars that are leading experts in the field of blockchain and academia.”

 The journal is open access, online and in-print and aims to unite industry and academia, providing evidence based resources and research on blockchain, DLT and cryptocurrencies. All published articles are permanently archived and available at Scholasticahq website and will be indexed on Google Scholar. Although the journal is available online, exclusive content will be available in the first print edition which is due for release in the Summer.

 Print copies of the Journal will be sent to the House of Commons, All Party Parliamentary Group on Blockchain (APPG), the House of Lords, all major banks, Fin-tech corporations and Universities, and made available (upon request) at major international blockchain conferences. 

 Submit your article before 30th May for a chance to be featured in the inaugural print edition.

 About British Blockchain Association

 The British Blockchain Association (BBA) is the UK’s first network dedicated to the promotion and adoption of blockchain technology. The BBA Advisory Board includes industry leaders, academics and international blockchain experts who actively work with, and influence, BBA Members, Partners and Policy makers. The JBBA is Europe’s first peer reviewed journal dedicated to blockchain. The JBBA Editorial Board includes industry leaders and eminent scholars and from top UK and international academic institutions.


