VIPR wins ACORD Leadership Award 2017

November 21, 2017

London-based pioneering software solutions firm, VIPR, has triumphed at this year’s ACORD Awards ceremony, held in Boston, Massachusetts on 26 October 2017.

 The company, that offers bespoke solutions to the insurance industry, took home the ACORD Leadership Award, which celebrates VIPR’s outstanding demonstration of leadership and for its exceptional contributions to the industry. The awards night, which was attended by VIPR’s CEO, Bob Brown, and Chief Technology Officer, Paul Templar concluded ACORD’s three-day conference in style. Travelling across the pond for the event, the VIPR team was excited to be Exhibitor Sponsors, hosting its very own stand throughout the duration of the conference.

 “We are immensely proud of our success at this year’s ACORD Awards,” said VIPR CEO, Bob Brown. “ACORD is renowned globally for its work within the insurance industry, so to be recognised by the association is a real honour. We thoroughly enjoyed the conference and the opportunity to introduce our tailored solutions to potential new clients in the US.”

 “We are pleased to see VIPR honored with this year’s ACORD Leadership Award,” said Peter Teresi, Chief Executive Officer, ACORD Solutions Group (ASG). “This award recognizes VIPR’s deep understanding of the insurance market and its ability to develop solutions that help companies manage data and improve processes and technological capabilities.

 “Bob Brown discussed what is next for VIPR following the company’s win, “Whilst at the conference, we participated in a presentation to the ASG Board of Directors and some ACORD Board Members about an upcoming, innovative collaboration we are working on with ASG. This marked the first time solution providers presented their offerings to an ACORD Board. We look forward to a concerted and mutually beneficial relationship that will enhance both our solutions to the insurance market.”

 About VIPR:

 VIPR is a leading software provider for the insurance market specialising in solutions that focus on delegated authorities. VIPR Managed Service (VMS) is the latest additions to VIPR’s suite of products that include a bordereaux processing and management solution, coverholder management, quote and bind solutions, an audit portal and reporting tool. VIPR provides its products to a growing number of Lloyd’s managing agents, brokers, coverholders and insurance companies.

 www.viprsolutions.com

 For press information contact: Caroline Cross RONIN Marketing caroline@roninmarketing.co.uk 020 3326 5039


