Beringea invests in personalisation site for children’s products, My 1st Years

January 17, 2017

The company behind the dressing gown HRH Prince George wore when meeting President Obama has secured a £5m growth funding round.

 My 1st Years, the children’s gifts personalisation site, has secured £5m in growth funding led by venture and growth investor Beringea, and supported with funds managed by Hargreave Hale. The investment will be used to drive developments in operations, marketing and international expansion into the US.

 My 1st Years is an ecommerce company that provides personalised gifts for babies and children. The company was founded by Daniel Price and Jonny Sitton in 2009, and has since become a favourite with celebrities including Dannii Minogue and Elton John as well as the royals. The business previously secured £2m in funding from High Net Worth individuals, including Lord David Alliance, co-founder of Coats Viyella and co-owner of N Brown Group which includes Jacamo and Simply Be in its catalogue. This brings the total amount raised by My 1st Years so far to £7m.

 The announcement is fresh off the back on My 1st Years launching in Harrods last month. This is the latest in a number of retail partnerships including notonthehighstreet.com, John Lewis and Selfridges.

 Co-Founder and Joint Managing Director of My 1st Year, Daniel Price, commented,

 Having been through school and university together, Jonny and Daniel have known each other from the age of four. They initially came up with the idea for My 1st Years when they were working on a university project together, which brought to light the size and value of the baby products market. Inspired by NikeID tags, they saw the potential for a personlisation business, and set out to create it after they graduated. They were introduced to Beringea by their corporate finance advisor, Eleanor Wilkinson, ABG Corporate Finance last year.

 Investment Director at Beringea, Maria Wagner commented,

 This is the latest in a series of investments for Beringea in retail and ecommerce – a particular area of expertise for Wagner as the former Managing Director of Birchbox UK. The company invested in luxury watch reseller Watchfinder in 2014 and announced investment in the men’s styling site Thread last year, as well as technology companies Poq (app commerce) and Contact Engine (communications). The company also completed a partial exit on jewelry making company Monica Vinader in 2016, scoring 12x return on the initial investment. Its diverse portfolio covers a range of other industries including digital media, business software and services and consumer products.

 Check out My 1st Years here


