Pre- accelaration of Huge Thing – the final phase of 5th edition recruitment!

October 27, 2017

It is a fifth time Huge Thing (along with Alior Bank for the second time) is looking for promising startups, ready for intensive 4 months of work!

 On 20th of October participants qualified to the last phase of recruitment of our acceleration program had a chance to meet mentors, Huge Thing team and Alior Bank representatives. It was a great chance for them to discuss opportunities with Alior Bank.

 The last stage of recruitment was entered by 17 teams. Among the selected projects there are teams from Poland (BankMail, Cash Flow manager, CAT, Contract Checker, Game HR, MidYou, MoneyMonk, Pergam.in, Rublon, Supozu, Metrisco), from Moldavia (Fentury), India (lamOlly), Belarus (PingFin), Sweden (nektergal Financial Technologies), UK (Limitless) and Croatia (Query Storm). During three gatherings of pre-acceleration program teams are participating in workshops, individual meetings and they are getting to know each other. Attendees will have opportunity to take part in workshops about business model, pitching, finances, establishment of companies. Each of them will be also given a chance to meet with people from Alior Bank and verify their ideas. Crucial part will be getting to know the needs of banking in Poland. Huge Thing will also organize fintech discussion panel for participants.

 Only 12 teams will be chosen to acceleration program. Qualified teams from 4th December to 28th of March will be working in Warsaw on their projects and during this time they will also travel to London and Berlin and be a part of Speed Dating with investors. They will expand their knowledge in the fields of problem definition, target group identification, making the presentations and pitch decks, developing products and UX, pitching, marketing, communication, budgeting. Teams will be also supported in the process of gaining funds.
In order to obtain funding for the development of the project up to 200 thousand PLN (non-equity) startups will have to register the company under Polish law.

 More: www.hugething.vc

 ———————————————

 Acceleration program Huge Thing, organized by Huge Thing and Alior Bank, was among 10 projects selected by the Polish Agency for Enterprise Development in the Scale Up competition, implemented within the framework of the government program Start In Poland.

  

  

  


