Paysafecard is named 2nd best international company in Austria

February 5, 2018

Paysafecard, registered in Vienna and one of the global market leaders in pre-paid card solutions, has just been awarded one of the highest possible business accolades in Austria after it was named the second best international company operating in the country.  The national award, which was announced by the prestigious ‘Austrian Leading Companies’ (ALC) awards panel last night in Vienna, recognises excellence in sustainable commerce and best employer practices. For paysafecard, part of the Paysafe Group, it follows a win in a regional ALC award event last November.

 Udo Müller, CEO of paysafecard, commented on the award: “Having won the regional event last November, we were secretly hoping we would also do well in the national event.  The paysafecard team has been working relentlessly to drive innovation and success in our industry and we’re also very proud of the strides we have made as an employer of choice in Austria.  Winning this award validates the collective team efforts and motivates us to do bigger and better things in the months and years ahead.  I am very proud of the team I have behind me here in Austria as well as the wider Paysafe team who continue to lead and innovate in the global payments industry.”

 About Paysafe Group

 Paysafe is a leading global provider of end-to-end payment solutions. Our core purpose is to enable businesses and consumers to connect and transact seamlessly through our industry-leading capabilities in payment processing, digital wallets and online cash solutions. Delivered through an integrated platform, our solutions are geared towards mobile-initiated transactions, real-time analytics and the convergence between bricks-and-mortar and online payments. With over 20 years of online payment experience, a combined transactional volume of US$48 billion in 2016 and over 2,600 staff located in 12+ global locations, Paysafe connects businesses and consumers across 200 payment types in over 40 currencies around the world. For more information, visit: www.paysafe.com.

 

 


