Santiment closes successful token sale

July 10, 2017

Hard cap of 45,000 ETH (over $11m) achieved within two days 710 participants from around the world. Santiment community of 603 participants contributed 31,010 ETH139 Cofound.it supporters contributed 12,990.93 ETH. Santiment, the world’s first crypto-market information network, that combines data feeds and a crypto-financial content network, has successfully completed its token sale.

 The token sale reached Santiment’s stated hard cap of 45,000 ETH (over $11m) within 3 blocks (less than 45 seconds) after opening to the semi-public Cofound.it portion. The token sale fulfilled a number of Santiment’s stated aims and objectives, which included securing a wide and fair distribution of international investors that strengthened the network.

 The funds raised will also enable the development and design of the Santiment information and data feed network that aims to be definitive source of crypto-market information for investors looking to enter the digital currency sector.

 Maksim Balashevich, CEO and Founder said: We have been overwhelmed by how well the Santiment community and investors responded to the token sale. We now have a broad community of international investors aligned with Santiment’s stated goal of becoming the leading source of crypto-market information, and the financial resources to create it.

 Santiment currently boasts a number of private cryptocurrency data feeds for the new digital economy. As a data provider, Santiment provides flows of unstructured data to subscribing traders and investors, its long-term stated aim is to provide the highest quality objective crypto-market information to investors.

 About Santiment: Santiment is the world’s first crypto-market network, combining market datafeeds, blockchain analytics, and everything else crypto-traders need for this emerging market. Built by traders for traders, the network gives participants an information edge over the competitors thanks to machine learning and the wisdom of the crowd.

 Press Contact: John McLeodCEO, JEAAssociates Ltd Tel: 0044 7886920436 E-mail: john@jeaassociates.com


