Payworks to Enable Omnichannel Payment Processing for CyberSource’s Merchants Worldwide

June 29, 2018

Payment technology company, Payworks, announced its collaboration with Visa to integrate Payworks’ payment technology into the CyberSource payment management platform to enable an integrated Point of Sale solution and offer omnichannel payment processing capabilities to merchants worldwide.

 Payworks is a payment technology company, simplifying the way payment service providers integrate card acceptance into the Point of Sale and providing payment infrastructure to support the latest payment strategies of merchants. Cloud-based and easy to deploy, the Payworks solution enables CyberSource merchants to simply and quickly add Point of Sale card acceptance functionality, including EMV®, NFC and alternative payment schemes, to their suite of services.

 “It’s critical for our merchants to have access to simple, intuitive and secure payment experiences,” says Andre Machicao, SVP for Visa’s CyberSource team. “Collaborating with Payworks enhances our ability to further enable our clients in the creation of rich, integrated commerce experiences across a variety of channels, including the point of sale environment.”

 Payworks’ payment platform supports cross-channel payments and has the ability to support a variety of card terminals and POS solutions. Payworks clients are provided access to secure, PCI DSS & P2PE certified payment infrastructure as well as the latest card acceptance technologies.

 “The enhancement of eCommerce platforms to true omnichannel solutions is a necessity to serve merchants’ growing needs for unified payment platforms. Payworks continues to support leading PSPs and Acquirers with the required technology to offer easy card acceptance at the Point of Sale,” says Christian Deger, CEO & Co-Founder of Payworks. “We’re excited to partner with the CyberSource team and help to further develop payment acceptance for large-scale merchants globally.”

 About Payworks

 Payworks is the provider of next generation Point of Sale payment gateway technology. Developers of Point of Sale solutions for merchants can quickly and cost-efficiently integrate card payment functionality into their applications, and securely process EMV, contactless and mobile wallet transactions at the Point of Sale. With headquarters in Germany and offices in the U.K., the U.S. and Spain, Payworks provides its technology to leading acquirers and payment providers globally.


