Innovate Finance to host FinTech Growth Forum to enable startups to scale

July 19, 2017

Innovate Finance, the not-for-profit membership association for the global FinTech sector, announced it will host the inaugural FinTech Growth Forum to assist FinTech startups on their scaling journeys on Tuesday 19th September in London.

 Building on the success of its member-orientated scaling series, the growth forum will provide a platform for startups to engage and learn about the opportunities to grow their businesses.  The forum will be structured across three main tracks: Growth, Capital and Culture. It will aim to help startups answer some of the most pressing questions on their scaling journey, such as:

 Over 500 delegates are expected to attend the one-day event, which will bring together leading FinTech startups from across the sector, industry influencers and world renowned brands.

 The Forum will also provide dedicated opportunities for investors and institutions to fast track their FinTech engagement.

 Open primary to Innovate Finance members, members of the wider FinTech ecosystem will have the opportunity to bid for a limited amount of tickets to attend.

 Tickets for the event are now on sale here.

 About Innovate Finance

 Innovate Finance is an independent membership association that represents the UK’s global FinTech community. Founded in 2014 with the support of the City of London and Canary Wharf Group, Innovate Finance is a not-for-profit that aims to accelerate the country’s leading position in the global financial services sector by directly supporting the next era of technology-led financial services innovators, whether they be a young start-up or an established industry player. The goal is to create a single point of access across the sectors to help foster enabling policies, regulation, talent development, business growth opportunities and investment in the UK — and, most importantly, to create a global finance sector that offers services that are more sustainable, more inclusive and better for everyone.


