Jenner & Block Launches Fintech Industry Group

May 15, 2018

Jenner & Block announced the formation of a FinTech industry group, expanding the firm’s strong reputation in advising clients on complex financial services and consumer-related matters. Anchored by a team of experienced former government officials, prosecutors and in-house counsel, the practice focuses on advising FinTech companies and businesses that rely on financial technology in navigating challenges in this increasingly complex area of commerce.

 Jenner & Block’s FinTech team represents payment companies, lenders, mortgage brokers, trading technology firms and other FinTech companies on an array of sophisticated issues core to their business. Leveraging their industry knowledge and significant capabilities, our team members assist clients in government and internal investigations, data and cyber security, compliance and controls, intellectual property protection, corporate and transactional matters, dispute and controversy resolution and insurance coverage. They also counsel clients on issues relating to cryptocurrencies, initial coin offerings (ICOs) and blockchain and distributed ledger technology.

 Terrence J. Truax, Jenner & Block’s managing partner said: “Our outstanding group of lawyers has been advising both new market participants and established corporate clients on their most challenging issues in this growing space. This practice fits well within our focus on complex and sophisticated matters. We are excited to build out a full-service offering with our multidisciplinary practitioners and to work strategically with businesses to address and stay ahead of new developments as financial technologies and the regulatory landscape continue to evolve.”

 The group includes lawyers from all offices including London-based Partners Kelly Hagedorn and Peter Pope. Ms. Hagedorn, a member of the firm’s Investigations, Compliance and Defence Practice, focuses on white collar crime, bribery and corruption and international disputes involving fraud allegations, as well as on data privacy and cybersecurity issues. Mr. Pope, co-chair of the Jenner & Block’s Investigations, Compliance and Defence Practice, represents individuals and entities as defendants, targets, subjects or witnesses in criminal and regulatory investigations and proceedings, and has conducted internal investigations around the world.

 The group also includes Partners David Bitkower, Kali Bracey and Nancy C. Libin, all former US government officials with deep knowledge in issues relating to the industry, and former GE Capital litigation counsel Joseph L. Noga, who has significant consumer finance experience.

 About Jenner & Block
Jenner & Block LLP is a law firm with global reach, with more than 500 lawyers and offices in Chicago, London, Los Angeles, New York and Washington, DC.  The firm is known for its prominent and successful litigation practice and experience handling sophisticated and high-profile corporate transactions.  Firm clients include Fortune 100 companies, large privately held corporations, financial services institutions, emerging companies and venture capital and private equity investors.

 Jenner & Block London LLP is a limited liability partnership established under the laws of the state of Delaware, USA and is authorised and regulated by the Solicitors Regulation Authority with SRA number 615729. Jenner & Block London LLP is affiliated with Jenner & Block LLP, which operates Jenner & Block’s offices in the United States.

 About Jenner & Block’s Fintech Group
Combining litigation, investigations, transactional and regulatory experience, Jenner & Block’s FinTech industry group assists clients with issues relating to the evolving and often uncertain realities of the financial technology marketplace. Services include counselling on sophisticated issues relating to cryptocurrencies, ICOs, blockchain and distributed ledger technology, payments, marketplace lending, machine learning and artificial intelligence and biometrics, as well as securities, tax, insurance and other issues including data security, compliance and controls, intellectual property protection, corporate and transactional matters, dispute and controversy resolution and insurance coverage.


