Inspirational speakers announced as registration goes live for ISLEXPO 2018

February 23, 2018

The first inspirational speaker line-up for ISLEXPO 2018 has been announced, focusing on this year’s theme, ‘locate’.

 Lead speakers will include the Group Head of Brand and Creative at Innocent Smoothies – Dan Germain, expert in societal and cultural trends and the effects they have for businesses and nations – Thimon de Jong, and former social media editor of British Glamor, blogger, author, speaker, consultant, and podcast host, Emma Gannon.

 Hosted by the Department for Enterprise, ISLEXPO 2018 is free to attend, giving delegates access to a full day of content on Wednesday 16th May, including access to the post-5pm late programme in the Garden Hub. Registration is now live at www.islexpo.com 

 Laurence Skelly MHK, Minister for Enterprise, commented:

 ‘The Isle of Man Programme for Government committed to growing the economically active population, promoting our Island and its qualities. ISLEXPO will be embracing this commitment by focusing this year on the theme of ‘Locate’, exploring the benefits of living and working in the Isle of Man.

 ‘With an emphasis on talent and recruitment, future-proofing businesses and nurturing innovation here at home, ISLEXPO 2018 has something for people at all stages of their business and employment growth.

 ‘As well as a strong line-up of inspirational speakers, ISLEXPO 2018 will also provide a multitude of networking opportunities and the ability to engage directly with our Enterprise Support team on the funding, advice, and training available to Isle of Man businesses.’

 Lead speakers for ISLEXPO 2018 include Dan Germain, Group Head of Brand and Creative at Innocent, famous for their fruit smoothies and imaginative branding. Having worked at Innocent since it started in 1999, Dan has first-hand knowledge of the entrepreneurial ability, innovation, creativity and original marketing it takes to succeed.

 Also confirmed for ISLEXPO 2018 is Thimon de Jong – formerly Director of Insight and Strategy at Dutch trends interpretation agency TrendsActive, Thimon looks at changes in gender, society and demographics to predict what organisations will have to deal with to stay ahead.

 Also taking to the ISLEXPO Main Stage is social media expert Emma Gannon whose award-winning blog has been published everywhere from the Telegraph to Teen Vogue.

 Clive Dixon, Senior Partner at Moore Stephens, the VIP Drinks sponsor for 2018, commented:

 ‘ISLEXPO provides a unique platform for businesses of all sorts and sizes to get together and explore the opportunities the Isle of Man offers for the future. At Moore Stephens, we have a rich history of helping our clients thrive in a changing world and we are thrilled to support ISLEXPO with what promises to be a very entertaining, educational and inspirational event.’

 Current sponsors of ISLEXPO 2018 are Barclays, KPMG, Manx Telecom, The International Stock Exchange (TISE), Sure, Cyberscience, Isle of Man Bank, and Moore Stephens.

 To register for a free place at ISLEXPO 2018 or to find out more, visit www.islexpo.com Further announcements and the full programme will be released in March.

 Sponsorship opportunities are still available, please contact ISLEXPO organisers Revel for more information: Sam Jones; sam@revelevents.uk; + 44 (0) 7624 332903. The ISLEXPO Sponsorship Pack can be downloaded from www.islexpo.com


