Crowdfest – festival of crowdfunding

September 21, 2016

Crowdfunding is undoubtedly popular, helping companies innovate financially. Crowdfest is your opportunity to get involved, and learn how crowd funding can transform your business strategy. Whilst learning how to transform your company using crowdfunding, simultaneously, Crowdfest will give you the opportunity to network with everybody around you. 

 So, why Crowdfest? Have there been not enough crowdfunding events?

 No-one has organised a big event on crowdfunding yet, aimed at both investors as well as fundraisers. There have been one-day events, but these have tended to focus on internal issues of most interest to the platforms themselves.

 What’s your approach?

 As crowdfunding covers such a wide range of topics – everything from charities to property and gaming – we introduced ten separate streams and workshops, each focussing on specific areas, spread over two days so all attendees will find something of interest.

 We even have a stream on sharia-compliant crowdfunding on Day Two (I think this is a significant growth opportunity) and so delegates particularly interested in this specialist topic might just attend the second day.

 We have also tried to make the event as interactive as possible. Nearly all the sessions in the main theatre consist of mini-panels where 3 or more speakers since this format provokes more interesting discussion and debate than scripted deliveries.

 Finally, we want people to get together and share ideas and connections as a crowd. As well as live pitching and polling, there will be other fun experiences – for example a whole area run by Games London, given over to the latest VR and games which people can try out. So plenty of serious content – but also opportunities for networking and fun in case you need some time ofut of office to enjoy cool new tech based entertainment.

 Ok, how about real opportunities to get funding? 

 Crowdfest seems to have captured people’s imagination: not only do we have a fantastic line up of speakers (well known entrepreneurs, investors, platforms, sector-specific experts), but we have also attracted some serious industry backing too, including the Federation of Small Businesses, Institute of Directors, British Banking Association, UK Business Angels Association and the CBI.  And, of course, the UK Crowdfunding Association who have helped put it all together.

 So in a nutshell, why should we go there? 

 Crowdfest is a unique opportunity to share knowledge and experiences, meet investors, platforms and advisers and make lasting contacts with fellow entrepreneurs and like minded individuals – all in one place, one time, one crowd.

 No other event is as rich in content and speakers and Crowdfest represents a once-only opportunity to meet platforms, investors and CEOs of multi-million pound fundraised companies all in one go.

 Convinced. When and where? 

 Crowdest takes place on Wednesday 19th and Thursday 20th October in Shoreditch Town Hall, London. You can attend one or both days, depending on what interests you, and can find further details at:www.crowdfest.co.

 For live pitching opportunities, please contact: daisy@crowdfest.co


