Dealer In-Showroom Experience Brought to the Online World with Close Brothers Motor Finance

April 6, 2018

Close Brothers Motor Finance has announced it’s launching a new portal that gives motor dealers the opportunity to take the showroom directly to their customers.

 The innovative multichannel platform is delivered in partnership with financial technology experts Codeweavers. The enhanced and specially adapted version of Codeweavers’ highly acclaimed Showroom Suite will allow dealers to quote multiple finance products and compare them side by side without having to re-enter information, making the process more efficient, and easier for customers to select the best product for them.

 The Showroom Suite is designed to work in tandem with a dealer’s website, which will help their customers to choose the perfect vehicle and finance option. Throughout the process, dealers can guide and advise the customer, providing the personal touch that can usually only be delivered in the showroom.

 The launch of the Showroom Suite is designed to help dealers bring the personal in-showroom car buying experience into the online world.

 Joe Soule, Chief Information Officer at Close Brothers Motor Finance, comments: “Consumer buying behaviour has changed considerably and the market has become increasingly digital. Technological advances cannot be ignored. Our dealers provide a high level personal service with a strong ethos on local reputation, a vital differentiator in an increasingly digital market. Ensuring dealers are supported is a crucial part of our business, so we’re pleased to be working with Codeweavers and their Showroom Suite to provide exceptional service to their customers whether online or face to face.”

 Shaun Harris, Sales Director at Codeweavers: “It’s been great working with the Close Brothers Motor Finance team and their dealer partners. With their feedback and insights, we have customised our Showroom Suite technology to their needs. It is designed to be easy for dealers to be up and running with the technology quickly. Once installed, dealers have quickly seen the ease and effectiveness for themselves, which is just what our support team aimed to deliver.”

 About Close Brothers Motor Finance

 Close Brothers Motor Finance, a division of Close Brothers Group plc, has been helping people to purchase vehicles for 30 years. Close Brothers Motor Finance work in partnership with over 8,000 motor dealers, and specialise in financing new and used cars, motorbikes and light commercial vehicles. They are a merchant banking group providing lending, deposit taking, wealth management services, and securities trading.

 About Codeweavers

 Codeweavers is wholly focused on the development of Finance sales technology and have supplied specialist software products to the automotive sector for over 16 years. Through digital innovation and using the latest technology, Codeweavers increase profitability and the quality of leads delivered to the network via the provision of effective motor finance retailing software.


