SPRING CITY FASHION – INDEPENDENT LUXURY ACCESSORIES & ESSENTIALS FOR THE DISCERNING CITY WORKER

May 18, 2017

Uncovering the Essence of Modern City Life

 SPONSORED BY THE MONTCALM ROYAL LONDON HOUSE

 Whatever the time of day or year it’s important we all indulge in a few little luxuries every now and again. It doesn’t matter what your style is or which bit of your wardrobe you like indulging in, there’s something out there for everyone.

 This month I’ve sought out some new designers as well as a couple of more established independents, who all provide that special little extra luxury.

 Starting with accessories, the newly launched Vertex watch is tipped to quickly become a City must-have. Heritage British design is mixed with Swiss engineering to entice interesting people to an interesting watch. The Vertex M100 lives up to the hype, oozing a ruggedly elegant design, it is waterproof, luminous, precise and comes with a lovely history, the company being resurrected by the founder’s great-grandson (£2,500).

 For ladies, the launch of new limited edition handbags Marrieke Elizabeth, designed by a former city CFO is another top trend tip. Design inspiration is taken from the seabed, providing a stylish and fresh new look for capsule evening bags and backpacks in a variety of colours; the Naked Urchin, Jellyfish & Spider Crab. The Italian napa leather, soft suede and craftsmanship means these bags not only look great, but are wonderfully tactile and feel divinely soft and sensuous (from £645).

 Moving onto the f-under-mentals, London based designer ZLDN Underwear’s striking African designs make them a fun must-have luxury. Designed with special panelling for extra comfort, men’s boxers and women’s briefs are made from micro-modal material (a plant derivative that’s breathable and supersoft). They cost just £21 a pair or less as part of a subscription.

 Another family business has also been revived, this time by a former corporate lawyer, to create a thriving ‘Smart Comfort’ sleep and lounge-wear company. Derek Rose also uses a bespoke micro-modal material to create his signature Basel MicroModal V-neck T-shirt (£69) – a silky soft delight for the skin, while his cashmere track pants – yes, it’s a real thing – are the surprise star of this collection – honestly, once you’ve tried them, you’ll never take them off (£499)!

 For the outer layer, there are many bespoke designers driving City fashion – Amanda Thompson’s quintessentially British couture SS17 lines feature simple and elegant cuts using high quality fabrics in vibrant colours from candy pink to electric blue. The season’s hero piece is a women’s teal tuxedo suit made in a wool-silk mix and lined in silk paired with a yellow shirt for the ultimate in luxurious tomboy chic (£1,100). For less flamboyant days the blue and cream animal print shirt dress is brilliantly versatile (from £395).

 For men, Cad and The Dandy’s new season Fresco Lite travel suits use a new cloth from Hardy Minnis. Made in England, it combines light-weight durability and crease resistance – making it a great option for sharp dressed, business travellers. Bespoke two piece suits start at £1,500 (machine sewn from £1,100).

  

  

 Written by Emily Manson

  

  

  

 FIN-ESSENCE CITY LIFE IS SPONSORED BY

 Prosecco & The City

 When you’ve something to celebrate, or just fancy a night of indulgence, make it really sparkle with the Montcalm Royal London House’s Prosecco in the City Package and savour a bottle of chilled bubbly in your room on arrival. Not only that, but a freshly baked, beautifully decorated cake and fresh seasonal fruit will also be provided as the perfect accompaniment while you relax and enjoy the start of your evening. To make a booking visit www.montcalmroyallondoncity.co.uk

 If you want to be featured in the lifestyle section, contact katia@fintnews.com


