Research Reveals 87% of Technology Professionals Believe “blockchain will be as transformative for business as the internet has been”

May 11, 2018

New research from Intrinsic Insights commissioned by BTL Group, has revealed that after reduced costs, the main benefits of blockchain technology are greater data security and protection against cyber threats.

 The research also revealed:

 Nearly 9 in 10 technology professionals believe blockchain technology will be as transformative for business as the internet has been. At a time that concerns over data are at their highest, blockchain technology is considered a very adept way to provide greater privacy.

 Dominic McCann, CEO of BTL Group said: “In a world of increasing concerns over the security and integrity of our data, individuals and businesses are realising the inherent benefits that applications built on blockchain technology can provide when keeping people’s data private. This research also illustrates just how many businesses are looking at using blockchain and of those that are yet to explore it, there is a significant proportion looking to do so in the next two years.”

 After two years of high profile and successful blockchain projects, learning how blockchain can be developed better, BTL Group will be test launching Interbit‘s multiple blockchain platform – a next-generation platform that has unique “chain joining” capability specifically created so that developers and businesses can quickly, easily and securely build applications.

 Tackling these issues head-on, after two years of development and investment, Interbit’s unique “chain joining capability” has the capacity to inter-connect many thousands of Interbit blockchains per solution, in completely private, secure and horizontally scalable manner, addressing the shortcomings of.

 A token-free blockchain platform, Interbit has been developed for ease of use. Whether users be a global enterprise, business innovator or software developer, the platform has been written in JavaScript to produce a level of simplicity that is efficient for users and requires no need to learn new programming languages or tools.

 Tom Thompson, CTO of BTL Group Ltd. said: “After two years of successfully completed high profile proof of concepts, significant investment and committed development, we are ready to release our Interbit platform for testing and feedback. What we have built is a next generation blockchain platform that allows users to benefit from our chain joining capability by easily and quickly building fast, scalable and secure blockchain applications. Developers can be up and running on an Interbit blockchain within minutes.”

 BTL are the perfect example of a tech success story, with the knowledge and experience on how blockchain can be used to better address the privacy of data issue that is so topical at the moment.

 About BTL™  and Interbit™

 Listed on the TSX Venture Exchange (TSX Venture:BTL) and operating from both Canada and the UK with offices in Vancouver, Calgary and London, BTL is a technology platform provider that owns Interbit, a next generation blockchain platform which enables business applications to be built quickly, easily and securely.

 Interbit can be licensed by developers and businesses who can build and share their own applications in a trusted ecosystem, allowing them to embrace new revenue generating opportunities. Interbit meets the speed, scale and privacy that older generations of blockchain technology cannot achieve by using chain joining technology to connect multiple blockchains. It offers a simpler, more secure, new way of computing.


