Consumers and businesses can now pay and transfer between multiple currencies using Mastercard ‘Flow Prepaid’ and ‘Echo Prepaid’

May 1, 2018

Enumis, an electronic money institution, announces the launch of their two branded prepaid cards, Flow and Echo, as well as Enumis eWallet account – marking yet another market-changing step within the Prepaid market. Enumis is FCA-regulated and Principal Mastercard© member, specialised in providing financial services to consumers, corporates and governmental bodies.

 In putting innovation and customer-centricity at the forefront of their development, Enumis has collaborated with Global Processing Services (GPS) to launch a selection of flexible, tailored payment solutions offering financial inclusion and bespoke, user-friendly services with the required standard security obligations and purchase protection. Global Processing Services, an industry-leader in issuer processing, was selected on the basis of the flexibility that their GPS Apex platform provides and the speed to market that Enumis could utilise and expand its rapidly growing operations.

 The launch of Enumis’ new Mastercard© Prepaid products, Flow and Echo, allows cardholders to pay and transfer between multiple currencies with competitive market rates. Exceptionally user-friendly functionality allows customers to receive transfers from third parties and transfer prepaid balances between cards. For added convenience, Enumis additionally provide an eWallet account and SMS banking, which can be linked to any Echo and Flow cards for added security and effortless money management.

 Flow Prepaid Mastercard© for consumers offers ease of access and financial inclusion to all individuals without the need for a credit check to open an account. Since the card is not linked to the cardholder’s bank account the Flow Prepaid Mastercard© also provides added security for online purchases. Customers have the ability to receive replacements for lost or stolen cards within couple of days and access a customer service team 24/7 all year round.

 The Echo Prepaid Mastercard© provides truly tailored business solutions for anything between payroll, employee expenses and corporate branded prepaid cards. Managers will have the ability to activate or remove employee cards and transfer funds immediately, allowing staff to work to their maximum capabilities whilst reducing business operational financial overheads.

 Suresh Vaghjiani, Managing Director at GPS comments: ‘Enumis are demonstrating through these new product launches how prepaid continues to provide a secure way to manage money, as well as flexibility in terms of developing innovative solutions that are really needed both by consumers and businesses. We are delighted that our GPS Apex platform enables companies such as Enumis to push the boundaries of innovation and launch products to market that are making a real difference.’

 Ali Latif, CEO at Enumis comments: ‘We are extremely excited partnering with GPS. Their robust platform provides the technical flexibility for us to meet our business objectives, whilst providing a spectrum of products to meet market demands.  The flexibility of the GPS platform has been instrumental in being able to create products that really drive our innovation in the prepaid and e-money arena.

 In a market place which changes frequently, financial adaptability is a key requirement to move forward and innovate. We are fortunate to have GPS processing platform to enable us to meet our financial objectives.  GPS provides the necessary tools to thrive and is pivotal to our aim to create solutions that utilise the best in the leading technologies of today, tomorrow and beyond.’

 About Global Processing Services

 Global Processing Services (GPS) is the issuer processor enabling many of today’s most high-profile fintech innovators and disruptors. It is certified by Mastercard© and Visa to process and manage any credit, debit or pre-paid card transaction globally.

 GPS enables the emerging payments industry to deliver breakthrough innovations through a unique combination of proprietary technology, its people and partners.

 At the heart of its capability is GPS Apex, its single global issuer processing platform. Built entirely by its own payment experts, GPS Apex offers easy integration with Issuers, Programme Managers, card manufacturers and many other service providers.

 It has integrated with over 40 issuing banks globally and operates programmes for 100+ clients in 60 countries using over 150 currencies, enabling its clients to innovate and deliver exciting new value propositions for end users around the world.

 About Enumis

 Enumis is an FCA Authorised Electronic Money Institution, FCA Authorised Consumer Credit License holder and Principal Mastercard® member. Our licensing for Mastercard© and e-money is passported throughout the European Union.

 We aspire to be the market leader who specialise in providing financial services to consumers, corporates and governmental bodies.


