London Becomes Home to World’s First Crypto Sculpture:  “Crypto Connection” by Federico Clapis, Powered by Eidoo

June 19, 2018

This week the UK is displaying the world’s first public sculpture dedicated to the rapidly growing cryptocurrency ecosystem. “Crypto Connection – powered by Eidoo”, created by contemporary artist Federico Clapis and commissioned by the multi-currency crypto wallet and hybrid exchange Eidoo, is an imposing three meter bronze statue that poses questions about the future of global financing and the impact cryptocurrencies will have on future generations.

 The piece encourages onlookers to think about the current crypto hype in a new way and Eidoo had the statue erected to target a wider public outside the financial sector to contemplate what the future may look like operating with a new kind of digital currency.

 “Crypto Connection”, situated prominently at Observation Point on London’s Southbank between the OXO Tower and the BFI, has been deemed one of the most ambitious marketing projects in the crypto world to date. The use of classical sculpture in polished bronze together with a provocative futuristic topic juxtaposes perfectly to reflect the dichotomy of cryptocurrency itself: a seemly fleeting trend, yet built to endure.

 The blockchain world will remember Eidoo from its last marketing effort when the company took a full page ad in the Wall Street Journal to tease JP Morgan’s CEO Jamie Dimon. The company returns with this very original initiative which will be on London’s Southbank for just 10 days.

 

 For many, cryptocurrency is a concept which lives up to its name – too cryptic to understand, to current to ignore. However its fast-growing popularity and increased controversy is propelling the world to think how the future of finance will look.

 Throughout the unveiling event, Eidoo premiered Wallem, a Pokemon Go style game for crypto enthusiasts where users can walk around a city collecting crypto tokens. $30,000 in crypto tokens such as Bitcoin, Eidoo and Ethereum, were placed within 300 metres of the sculpture for those who downloaded Wallem to catch.

 An innovative mix of augmented reality, users battled to steal tokens from each other in an interactive, single or multiplayer game that is set to quickly establish itself as a trend in 2018.

 Lars Schlichting CEO of Eidoo said, “We’re thrilled to unveil the first crypto sculpture in the world in the creative hub of London. With the crypto space developing fast we wanted to explore a way to communicate with a wider public using the hugely engaging medium of art. We have immensely enjoyed working with Federico Clapis who has managed to capture our intention through this awe-inspiring piece. We’re delighted to warmly invite all who are interested to visit the sculpture until the 23rd June.”

 

 Pictured: Artist, Frederico Clapis with his bronze sculpture, Crypto Connection.

 About Federico Clapis

 Federico Clapis is an Italian painter, writer and performer. Through his art, Federico is renowned amongst his peers for his visionary way of opening dialogue around technological topics. Federico Clapis (born 4 April 1987, Milan) is an Italian artist, sculptor and performer. He became famous in his country thanks to a unique strategy to promote his paintings. For five years he worked “undercover”, producing viral video comedies, accumulating millions of fans and views and becoming one of the country’s most well known YouTubers. In September 2015, at the peak of his success, after writing and starring in a movie, he announced his retirement from the entertainment world and transformed his online presence into a powerful instrument to propagate and promote his canvas art works that had previously been hidden. He revealed his true nature and the digital public responded with even greater favor, making him one of the most influential artists on social networks to date.

 About Eidoo

 Eidoo is a fast, easy multicurrency wallet and hybrid exchange for blockchain assets, and the first human-to-blockchain interface for all cryptocurrency needs. Eidoo is available to download for free from the iOS app store, from the Google Play Store for Android, and for all desktop devices such as Linux, Mac and Windows.

 About Wallem

 Wallem is a mobile game that will be available for both iOS and Android devices. Similar to Pokemon Go, it will allow users to catch tokens while they walk around a city thanks to GPS and augmented reality technology. Players can gather (catch) the tokens they find on the territory and steal them (snatch) from each other, using their own device in AR+ at close range. To capture others’ tokens and defend your own, you need a strategy, special items, experience and team play.


