SimpleFinance Successfully Prices its Debut Eurobond Issue

July 3, 2017

London, 29 June 2017 – LLC MKK SimpleFinance (“SimpleFinance” or the “Company”), a Russian fintech company specialising in accessible micro-lending to small and medium-sized business, announces the pricing of its debut Eurobond issue of USD 30 million, with a 3-year tenor and a coupon rate of 10.5% per annum.

 The issuer of the Eurobonds is SF Holdings Company Plc (the parent company of SimpleFinance), and the guarantor of the Eurobonds is SimpleFinance.

 It is expected that the placement and settlement will be completed on 3 July 2017. Renaissance Capital acted as the sole advisor on the issue and the dealer. Latham & Watkins acted as the legal advisor.

 This placement is the first for SimpleFinance and for any Russian fintech company providing financial services to small and medium-sized business.

 Funds from this Eurobond issue will be used to finance the further growth of the Company’s loan portfolio.

 SimpleFinance CEO Alexey Basenko said:

 “This Eurobond placement is not only an important debut for us, but it also represents a significant milestone for the Russian fintech market as a whole.

 “We established SimpleFinance just over two years ago and in this short period of time our team has made tremendous progress, creating a sustainably profitable business with high-quality risk management and corporate governance systems in place. We are also one of the first in the sector to publish Big-4 audited IFRS reporting.

 “The results of this placement are fully in line with our expectations, and very attractive for a debut issue. This will diversify SimpleFinance’s capital structure and opens the door for future capital markets activities, and to further optimise our funding structure in the future. “

 About the Company

 SimpleFinance was founded in 2015 and offers a unique product line of affordable financing tools for small and medium-sized businesses in Russia:

 In addition, the Company has built its own P2P-platform, called SimplyFi, for small and medium-sized businesses to raise funds directly from private investors.

 Thanks to its robust IT platform and in-house know-how in the field of risk management, as well as fully electronic document processing, clients can count on fast decision-making and high-quality service. At the same time, all customer interactions take place online, without the need to visit an office in person, saving time and money.

 SimpleFinance is licensed by the Central Bank of Russia and is a member of the Association of Factoring Companies.

 

 Press Contacts: SimpleFinance Moscow Victoria Kolossov Tel.: + 7-495-150-40-11 E-mail: press@simplefinance.ru EM Moscow Denis Denisov Tel.: + 7-985-410-3544 E-mail: denisov@em-comms.com London Maria Levitov Phone: + 44 7553 092 429 E-mail: levitov@em-comms.com

 The information contained herein does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy nor shall there be any sale of the securities referred to herein in any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration, exemption from registration or qualification under the securities laws of any jurisdiction.

 This communication is not an offer for sale of any securities in the United States. Securities may not be offered or sold in the United States absent registration or an exemption from registration under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended. SF Holdings Company Plc has not registered and does not intend to register any portion of any offering in the United States or to conduct a public offering of any securities in the United States. Notwithstanding the foregoing, prior to the expiration of a 40-day distribution compliance period (as defined under Regulation S under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended) commencing on the closing date, the securities may not be offered or sold in the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons, except pursuant to another exemption from the registration requirements of the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended.

 The offering to which this communication relates will be made on the basis that any offer of securities in any member state of the European Economic Area which has implemented the Prospectus Directive (each, a “Relevant Member State”) will be made pursuant to an exemption under the Prospectus Directive from the requirement to publish a prospectus for offers of securities.

 In Relevant Member States, this communication is directed only at persons who are “qualified investors” within the meaning of article 2(1)(e) of the Prospectus Directive.

 The expression Prospectus Directive means Directive 2003/71/EC (and amendments thereto, including the 2010 PD Amending Directive, to the extent implemented in the Relevant Member State), and includes any relevant implementing measure in the Relevant Member State and the expression 2010 PD Amending Directive means Directive 2010/73/EU.

 This communication is directed only at (i) persons who are located outside the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada or Japan, or (ii) persons who are located in the UK who either: (a) have professional experience in matters relating to investments falling within Article 19(1) of the UK Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Financial Promotion) Order 2005 (the “Order”), or (b) are high net worth entities, or (c) are other persons to whom it may lawfully be communicated, falling within Article 49(2) of the Order, (all such persons together being referred to as “relevant persons”). Any investment activity to which this communication relates will only be available to and will only be engaged with, relevant persons. Any person who is not a relevant person should not act or rely on this document or any of its contents.

 This communication or information contained therein is not an offer, or an invitation to make offers, to sell, exchange or otherwise transfer securities in the Russian Federation to or for the benefit of any Russian person or entity and does not constitute an advertisement or offering of securities in the Russian Federation within the meaning of Russian securities laws. Information contained in the communication is not intended for any persons in the Russian Federation who are not “qualified investors” within the meaning of Article 51.2 of the Federal Law no. 39-FZ “On the Securities Market” dated 22 April 1996, as amended (the “Russian QIs”) and must not be distributed or circulated into Russia or made available in Russia to any persons who are not Russian QIs, unless and to the extent they are otherwise permitted to access such information under Russian law. The securities have not been and will not be registered in Russia and are not intended for “placement” or “circulation” in Russia (each as defined in Russian securities laws) unless and to the extent otherwise permitted under Russian law.


