mCoin: The only Cryptocurrency for the 3 Billion People Without the Internet

June 28, 2018

This article is not financial advice, and buyers of these tokens do so at their own risk.

 More than half of the world’s population still do not have access to the internet and two billion people do not have a bank account or access to a financial institution via a mobile phone. mCoin is the world’s first Cryptocurrency which works on any mobile with or without the internet. It is supported on ONEm’s mobile ecosystem with many practical applications.

 So far more than 30,000 people from over 150 countries own mCoin and participating in the ongoing Initial Coin Offering (ICO). The support and commitment by the mCoin community is increasing daily.  One such supporter is an African Mobile Operator who will deploy mCoin’s virtual wallet and applications for their million plus subscribers.

 The rise of mCoin is due to ONEm’s adoption of blockchain technology on their SMS and Voice based Platform. More than half of the world’s population still do not have access to the internet and two billion people do not have a bank account or access to a financial institution via a mobile phone. Income is less than $2.5 a day, which presents a big opportunity for self perpetuation micro economics.

 mCoin is the first cryptocurrency with  “pseudo-mining” that lets users earn mCoins on any ordinary mobile. The pseudo-mining program will ensure the wide spread distribution and use of mCoins.

 Owners of mCoin Virtual wallet will allow users to send and receive mCoins to other people by a global ONEm name without having to input a long wallet address. They get credit-card like transaction histories that create creditworthiness.

 Investors from all around the world have already purchased mCoin at the initial offering which started at 3¢. After the 3rd of June mCoin will increase to 5¢.  When mCoin is listed on exchanges after July 2018 the price of mCoin is expected to reach 10¢.

 The future of mCoin is widespread adoption in ONEm ecosystem and integration with Mobile Operator services further increasing the value of mCoin.  By the end of 2018 mCoin value is forecast to be $1.

 Original mCoin buyers will benefit from special bonuses in the coming four weeks. These original mCoin holders will receive a personalized commemorative mCoin Holder Card. The popular mCoin Referral Program gives additional 5% bonus mCoins to the buyer and 5% to the person referring.

 These are exciting times for mCoin.

 DISCLAIMER: THE ABOVE REFERENCES AN OPINION, AND IS FOR INFORMATION PURPOSES ONLY. IT IS NOT INTENDED TO BE INVESTMENT ADVICE.


