FIN-ESSENCE CITY LIFE

February 2, 2017

SPONSORED BY THE MONTCALM ROYAL LONDON HOUSE

 Here at The Fintech Times we’re delighted to announce the launch of our new, monthly column Fin-Essence, your essential guide to modern city life, sponsored by the City’s newest luxury hotel The Montcalm Royal London House.

 

  

  

  

  

  

  

 

  

  

  

  

  

  

 I’m Emily Manson, a dyed-in-the-wool Londoner and lifestyle journalist with a passion for the little luxuries that make our days richer and more rewarding. Each issue I’ll highlight an intriguing new City entity – delving deep into the area’s creative DNA to bring you unmissable novelties that make our modern city so remarkable and unique.

 Whether it’s an artisan producer in Shoreditch, the launch of a new fitness craze or even a new must-visit shop, these gems will help make your City Life richer, more rewarding and just a touch more luxurious.

 Leading the ‘innovative luxury’ charge is The Montcalm Royal London House. Only opening late last year, it’s an absolute cracker that’s breathing new life into the previously lacklustre Finsbury Square. Its mix of timeless elegance with modern design has already spawned rave reviews and it’s fast becoming the hottest new venue in The City. The stylishly chic bedrooms and luxury suites are impressive and, speaking as a fusspot with sleep issues, I particularly love the pillow menu, changeable lighting and in-room aroma options. Its location means the hotel is truly versatile – perfect for cheeky last minute overnighters or a luxury weekend in the City, as well as the longer-stay suites with kitchenette being a great tip for visiting colleagues and clients. But the Montcalm Royal London House is also a great new – and, as yet, undiscovered – meetings venue – whether large or small. My favourites for a discrete gathering are the three Palm Suites on the 9th floor, although the ground floor lounge is ideal for presentations or after work receptions. The ‘fully monty’ conference & banqueting facilities for up to 300 are on the super-glamourous, chandelier-festooned lower ground floor and come with 10GB bandwidth – unique to the UK.

 The hotel’s two restaurants and bars, Burdock and Aviary, are run by the oh-so-lovely ETM Group (think Jugged Hare). They’re great venues for a quick business lunch as well as being a handily discrete place to surreptitiously meet the odd head-hunter! They’re also a top spot for post-work drinks and quick meetings with colleagues, while up on the 10th floor, Aviary’s heated rooftop terrace with breath-taking views of London landmarks is already a City bucket-list must.

 My top tip – the hotel’s urban spa has just opened* and Valentine’s Day is fast approaching – add some chill’ time in the pool, sauna and steam room to their Prosecco in the City package and you’ve got the perfect ‘wow-factor’ Valentine’s gift.

 * personal spa treatments are not yet available

 

 Emily Manson

 To find out more or make a booking call +44 (0) 20 7479 2233/ +44 (0) 20 7402 4288 or visit  www.montcalmroyallondoncity.co.uk

 

 The Montcalm Luxury Hotels is a collection of individual five star properties in London including M by Montcalm Shoreditch, The Montcalm London Marble Arch, The Marble Arch by Montcalm

 If you want to be featured in the lifestyle section, please contact katia@fintnews.com

  


