Ambrosus Hires Former Head of Swisscom’s Digital Lab As Chief Product Officer

October 12, 2017

Switzerland, 06 October, 2017 — Ambrosus, a Swiss blockchain and IoT supply chain ecosystem builder, has announced the hiring of Dr. Vlad Trifa, former head of Swisscom’s Digital Lab and veteran product engineer, as Chief Product Officer.

 The news comes just weeks after Ambrosus announced both its Token Generation Event and partnership with pharmaceutical pioneer, Trek Therapeutics – moves that strengthen Ambrosus’s product roadmap and goal of redefining the supply chain industry in the global economy.

 Dr. Trifa, previously acting as a technical advisor to Ambrosus, joined the team full-time after years of both entrepreneurial and product leadership experience. Prior to Swisscom, Dr. Trifa was the Co-Founder and Chief Product Officer at EVRYTHNG, a VC-backed IoT company with over $32 million (USD) raised from investors including Samsung and Cisco, and worked as an expert IoT researcher and at MIT and UCLA.

 Ambrosus CEO, Angel Versetti, describes the hiring as a “critical step in the right direction” as Ambrosus gains momentum and continues work with top experts to build sophisticated technology and solutions.

 Versetti explains, “Dr. Trifa’s immense experience will help further drive the potential of our project towards transforming traditional supply chains and commodity markets through the adoption of blockchain technology. Given the high-level expertise required for a project of this magnitude, it is crucial for us to not only consult with experts but to also bring them onboard to become formally involved, and fully immersed in building the technology that will underpin this ecosystem.”

 Dr. Trifa, a PHD holder in Computer Science from ETH Zurich, shares his excitement for the role. “Ambrosus is developing the sophisticated technology and full-stack solutions required to meet the ever-increasing standards of transparency and reliability in global supply chains,” Dr. Trifa said. “Working with the team at Ambrosus to set the standard for innovation and disruption emerging within the industry will be both an excitement and challenge we are ready to take.”

 Ambrosus, backed by both the United Nations 10YPF and Swiss Canton of Vaud, aims to continue its focus on IoT product development in an international context in the upcoming months.

 About Ambrosus:

 Ambrosus combines high-tech sensors, blockchain protocol and smart contracts to build Supply Chain 2.0: the first publicly verifiable and community-driven system to assure the quality, safety and origins of food & medicine. Based at the two top innovation hotspots in Switzerland (EPFL Innovation Park in Lausanne and Crypto Valley in Zug), Ambrosus boasts an experienced, global team and advisory board containing some of the world’s best thinkers and doers in the areas of quality assurance, sensor technology, and blockchain.

 More Information:

 http://www.ambrosus.com/TGE

 https://tge.ambrosus.com/

 Press Contact: 1c0handle@gmail.com


