Business profile: Businessman Seyfeddin Roustamov

October 30, 2017

Businessman Seyfeddin Roustamov, Permanently Resident in the US, is the Main Beneficial Owner of the Chemical Company “Metafrax”

 The information about Seyfeddin Roustamov was recently published in Russian press. He is a businessman living in the US now. “Kommersant” (Russian business newspaper) claims him to be the major beneficial owner of Russian company “Metafrax” with headquarters located in Gubaha, Perm Region, Russia. “Metafrax” company is one of the largest manufacturers of methanol and its derivatives in Russia and Europe. Here it is the translation of the original article.

 Beneficial owner of “Metafrax” company is the 55 year old businessman Seyfeddin Roustamov. This information appeared in Russian media and on the special website. Businessman is claimed to be professional in energy and chemical industries, as well as investor and philanthropist. He is reported to have become beneficiary of chemical plant in Gubakha in 2014. This information appeared during plant preparation for a large-scale project estimated at about 800 million EUR.

 “Kommersant” found out from representatives of “Metafrax”, that disclosure of the beneficiary aligns with changing requirements of Russian and International compliance laws.

 It’s all about businessman Seyfeddin Roustamov. Domain with his name was registered on 18th of September 2017 on the “Go Daddy”, one of the biggest registrar of domain names. Russian newspaper “Delovaya Tribuna” translated and published this information about the owner of “Metafrax”.

 According published info, Mr. Roustamov was born on the 17th of June 1962 in Qusar (Azerbaijan). He has a higher education (graduated from institute for humanities and social studies). He is married and has three children.

 Since 2000 he’s actively involved in commercial activities of trading chemical and petrochemical industry products, oil and gas projects, investments in energy funds, commercial and residential real estate. According to his website, majority shareholder of PJSC “Metafrax” is Russian company JSC “MetaHolding”, which is controlled by Seyfeddin Roustamov since 2014.

 By 2017 “Metafrax” has been consolidated into group of companies with industrial facilities in Russia (Perm Krai, Moscow Region) and Europe (Krems, Austria), it has become largest producer of methanol, formalin, synthetic resins. Annual revenues of “Metafrax” are over 40 billion rubles (USD 660 million). Annual volume of investments is about 5 billion rubles (USD 80 million). Chemical division produces methanol, formalin, pentaerythritol, hexamine, urea formaldehyde concentrate (UFC), synthetic resins, block and granulated polyamide, sodium formate and others. Products are exported to more than 50 countries. Annualtax liabilities settled to local and federal budgets are approx. 2 billion rubles (USD 32 million).

 Businessmen participates in charity in the field of health protection, transplantology, cancer diseases and in the sphere of education and art.

 From the beginning of 2000s beneficiaries of “Metafrax” have not been disclosed to the public. The interests of main shareholder were represented by Armen Garslyan, who is the chairman of the board of directors of “Metafrax” company since 2002. Among shareholders of Metafrax there were JSC “Sibur” (held shares of 33%), Panama-registered “Mirvac” and Cyprus-based “Lipanet Ltd.”. Cypriot Company held major share of “Metafrax” since 2007 and since 2017 it belongs to JSC “MetaHolding” that has consolidated shares and owns 92%.

 In the interview to “Kommersant” Mr. Garslyan noticed that ontop of developing chemical industry—major shareholder of “Metafrax” does a lot in charity, keeping low profile of these activities. He is involved in the global decisionmaking process of the company management 24/7, he is also aware of operational issues. Right now we are discussing three new major construction projects,” said Armen Garslyan. “We’ve got a vigorous leader,he knows, what we are doing, what are our targets and who accompanies us on the way to them,” so decribed Mr. Garslyan major shareholder of “Metafrax”.

 Information about major shareholder of chemical plant has become public as a result of changes in legislation as long as in preparation for large-scale project of “Metafrax”: company is going to begin ammonia, urea and melamine plant construction that will cost approx. 800 million EUR. Financing of this project is currently discussed with the banks.


