Huge Thing and Alior Bank welcome startups to apply for new edition of acceleration programme

August 10, 2017

Till 17th September teams can apply for new edition of Huge Thing acceleration programme, in partnership with Alior Bank.

 The accelerator is looking for projects focused on digital marketing, artificial intelligence, robotic advisors, virtual and augmented reality, payments, social banking, the blockchain, insurance banking and IoT.

 Applications are open till 17th of September. Start-ups will have another chance to gain 45 thousand euro to develop and speed up their ideas. More information about recruitment: www.hugething.vc

 The fifth edition will begin in December, ending in March 2018.

 Right now nine start-ups from Central Eastern Europe are developing their projects in Warsaw, under eyes of experienced mentors and employees of Alior Bank (the youngest and most innovative bank in Poland nowadays).

 Among the ideas taking part in the programme, there is a team working on tool not only recording teleconferences but also finding key words and highlighting threads, able to summarize discussed output.

 Struggling with feeling your power over protection of personal data? One of the startups has a solution to that. Keep forgetting to pay your bills? You will be able to do it with just one click on a platform developed by another start-up. One may find interesting a system which automates trade in digital resources.

 A full list of start-ups participating in the program available here

 So far start-ups participated in group workshops about business models, marketing, sales, building websites, team management, pitching their ideas and financial planning.

 Now they mainly focus on individual mentoring, tailored to their specific needs. They also had a chance to present themselves in front of investors during Speed Dating session.

 Huge Thing planned two trips for its participants – they will be travelling to London and Berlin to have a close-up look at European start-up scene. It gives them an opportunity to meet with foreign teams, investors and potential partners – everything they might need to enter external markets and develop their product globally.

 This is the first time Huge Thing is sending teams abroad. One edition after another, they constantly improve the programme by giving start-ups a chance to take from it as much as they need.

 “External roll-out of a product isn’t only about a translation of an app and investing in marketing. The crucial part is understanding the work culture and needs of potential foreign customers. London and Berlin are ones of the most important spots on European start-up map. These places offer a lot to tech start-ups. To make teams realize that, we’ve decided to offer them an opportunity to discover those places. Traveling can help a lot” – says Kasia Kołakowska, programme manager.


