Geodesic Capital Launches a $335 Million Fund to Bridge Silicon Valley, Japan, and Asia

May 17, 2016

Geodesic Capital, an independent growth stage venture capital firm investing in U.S. based consumer and enterprise technology companies, announced the close of its first fund, Geodesic Capital Fund I, totaling $335 million.

 Founded by former U.S. Ambassador to Japan John V. Roos and Ashvin Bachireddy, previously a growth stage partner at Andreessen Horowitz, a leading U.S. venture capital firm, Geodesic Capital is now set to bridge Japan and America.

 John V. Roos commented: “during my time as Ambassador, I traveled all over Japan talking about the importance of innovation and entrepreneurship to Japan’s economy. After returning to Silicon Valley, I found this to be the most deeply disruptive and innovative period in technology I have seen in my career and came to believe that Japan needed a much greater presence here. At the same time I saw a surging interest in Japan among the very best technology companies in the U.S. By launching Geodesic Capital, we aim to establish a bridge between Silicon Valley and Japan that will help the world’s most transformative technology companies enter the Japanese market and also help Japan’s most iconic companies establish a window into Silicon Valley innovation.”

 “Disruptive technologies are changing everything about the way we live and the way we do business. Geodesic Capital was founded to be the preferred funding partner for growth stage technology companies,” added Ashvin Bachireddy, Founding Partner at Geodesic Capital. “The best entrepreneurs are focused on building a global business. The network and experience of our team will help our portfolio companies access Japan and Asia, the world’s largest and fastest growing market,” he continued.

 Geodesic Capital announced the opening of Geodesic Japan GK, led by Marcus Otsuji, who was most recently a senior executive at Apple Japan. Geodesic Japan GK will provide Japan market entry and growth support for Geodesic Capital portfolio companies in Japan. In addition, Mitsubishi Corporation will assist Geodesic Japan GK in supporting portfolio companies entering the Japanese market.

  


