Money2020: ATB Financial rolls out the world’s first full-featured virtual banking assistant on Facebook Messenger

October 24, 2017

ATB Financial, officially launches a virtual banking assistant to the company’s more than 730,000 customers, working with Fintech Finn.ai to make access to secure, day-to-day personal banking as simple as initiating a conversation in Facebook Messenger.

 “We’re excited to bring conversational commerce to all our personal banking customers, delivering on our commitment to really make banking work for people,” says ATB Chief Technology Officer Wellington Holbrook about the new Messenger-based virtual assistant. “It lets you do your banking whenever, wherever, and however works best for you.”

 While Tier 1 global FI giants face off in the bank innovation race, being an agile mid-sized financial institution has allowed ATB to jump to the head of the pack. ATB has leveraged significant advantages in partnering with like-minded Fintechs – such as Finn.AI – to move quickly from proof of concept to full market deployment. Just last February, ATB announced it was testing AI and chatbot technology with hundreds of early adopters to enable banking through Facebook Messenger. Through rapid iteration and collaboration, over half a million personal banking customers now have access to Finn.AI’s industry-leading AI-powered virtual assistant.

 “AI is completely reinventing the consumer banking experience,” explains Jake Tyler, CEO at Finn.AI. “With the Finn.AI platform, you get more than immediate, secure banking access, you get smart, personalized financial insights to help you achieve your specific financial goals. We’re excited to join forces with ATB and bring this innovative technology to another segment of our fast-growing customer base.”

  

 Access ATB’s virtual banking assistant: @ATBFinancial (in Facebook Messenger) or from facebook.com/ATBFinancial

 About ATB Financial
With assets of $48.6 billion, ATB Financial is Alberta’s largest home-grown financial institution. Established in 1938, ATB is a network of 173 branches, 143 agencies, a Customer Care Centre, two Entrepreneur Centres, along with mobile and online banking. ATB’s more than 5,000 team members help more than 730,000 customers in 247 communities.

 About Finn.AI
Finn.ai is an award-winning, AI-powered virtual assistant built for banking and personal finance. With customers on four continents, and delivering service in three languages, Finn.ai and our team of data scientists, engineers, and financial industry experts are helping banks and credit unions transform customer engagement in a digital and cognitive age.

 SOURCE ATB Financial


