Time for the Banks to choose their strategic partners or get left behind?

May 24, 2016

Every action has risk, and banks are traditionally averse to risk, and therefore have been relatively slow to adopt new technologies, new practices, and new markets. This risk averse / change resistant position is the entire reason why fintech has emerged as a distinct sector, and why fintech challengers have been able to take major slices out of the banks’ core services. Money transfer, business lending, factoring, already heavily targeted by fintechs, next in line are mortgages, insurance services, and inevitably, consumer lending, already nibbled at by P2P systems.

 The most imminent risk for banks isn’t the replacement of their brands by challenger banks, that is some way off, if it happens at all. The most pressing and immediate risk is the erosion of their customers satisfaction by the banks failure to service their own customer base with credit products.

 When a bank declines their customer for a loan, forcing that customer to go elsewhere, they don’t just lose revenue; they lose good will. Multiply that by millions of refused loans a year, and it becomes clear the banks are not just wasting the opportunity to provide pro table services; they are sowing the seeds of their own long-term obsolescence.

 The mechanics of change within banks is a major obstacle, in terms of tech especially, which is why the simpler and fundamentally more common sense approach is to partner with fintech companies that have proven themselves to be of an equal or better reputational standing.

 Santander recently announced a UK partnership with Kabbage, and have been in strategic partnership with Funding Circle for several years. Both of these are US based and focused operations.

 US based Regions Bank, a component of Regions Financial Corporation, with $126B in assets; last month announced an agreement with Avant. This may be particularly significant, being the first of its kind in the unsecured personal loan space, and it could open the door, if not the flood gates, to high profile matches that provide win win win scenarios. The third win being the actual customers.

 The advantages for both parties in these kind of partnerships are clear, one provides the customers, the other provides the product / service experience, and they either share the risk and revenue or work out the details accordingly. It also opens up some interesting joint marketing opportunities, if they are able to let go of brand singularity and see it from the customers’ perspective that is. Collaborative marketing campaigns between banks and fintechs would spread costs and create additional consumer notice and interest, a true signifier that things have changed. Brand preciousness will have to be overcome first of course, and banks would have to be publicly open about the benefits of the partnerships, which is actually a huge opportunity, rather than a failure on their behalf, once the nettle is grasped.

 The delay in partnerships of this nature has been understandable; banks were never going to expose themselves to reputational risk by partnering with ‘upstart fintechs’, no matter how efficiently they were seemingly able to deliver. This is only slightly ironic, given that the fintechs could easily claim to risk brand reputation against the less than spotless UK banks, which have, lest we forget, successfully racked up fines in excess of £50 billion since the last financial crisis they were at least partly responsible for creating. Not many fintechs could claim that dubious honour. Nor have many fintechs been under criminal investigation from the US department of Justice, or been involved in massive and systematic rate rigging. Reputation wise, the banks have got away rather lightly considering the borderline criminal actions perpetrated under some of their brands.

 The truth is, the likes of Avant and Funding Circle are not ‘fintech upstarts’, they are actually major companies in their own right, with proven track records in both nance raising and client facing services. And given that they are now turning their attention to the UK market, one can only assume the next strategic bank partnerships will be the ones that turn millions of ‘computer says no’ loan applications into millions of satisfied shared customers. Of course some of the banks are frozen to the spot, not quite being sure of which way to turn, a situation which affords them a few more years of grazing before the challengers give up on collaboration and go straight in for the kill, which will inevitably occur sometime around the time the banks are required to open their APIs and therefor lose one of their key strengths.

 Is a happy shared customer better than a dissatisfied exclusive one?

 With the direction of the market clearly visible, the banks response to this simple question may be the differentiator and perhaps the determining factor for their longevity and survival. Inevitably some will move with the times, and some will wait and see what happens. The ones that don’t move from their position are sooner rather than later going to run out of grass. That’s pretty obvious, and when they finally raise their bovine heads to look for a partner, all they’ll see is rather smug looking lions.

 We spoke with 11 leading fintech-related companies, and we found out that three main topics were dominating in their answers: Partnership, PSD2/APIs and Disruption. We highlighted them in different colours, to show more clearly the recurring patterns.

 Hold tight, it’s a long ride, but worth reading. Now let’s see what they have to say.

 _______________________

 All banks at this stage should consider themselves challenger banks if they want to remain ahead of the curve. 


