Innovate Finance and the 9/11 Memorial & Museum hosted a forum on cyber security during the inaugural FinTech Week in NYC

May 1, 2017

Innovate Finance and 9/11 Memorial & Museum hosted Cyber Security Forum for New York FinTech Week. Partnership aims to forge closer FinTech links between New York and London to tackle Global Cyber Threats in financial services

 The Threat is Real: Financial Services, FinTech and Cybersecurity took place on April 27 th at the 9/11 Memorial Museum and examined how financial technology could help protect businesses, government agencies and individuals against cyber-attacks.

 The event hosted two panels comprised of influencers from the world of banking, FinTech and law enforcement. Innovate Finance has partnered with the 9/11 Memorial & Museum to support the immense FinTech talent that is based in the two cities and leading the world in the area of cybercrime security innovation.

 This forum was a first step towards a more collaborative approach to mitigating cyber risks, and encourages law enforcement, industry leaders and influencers to work together globally to fight existing and future cyber crime risks.

 “Cyber security is a major problem globally and impacts all businesses, including financial services firms. London and New York are home to the world’s biggest financial centres and are particularly vulnerable to attacks,” said Lawrence Wintermeyer, CEO of Innovate Finance. “The problem is only expected to grow in our highly connected, digital world, which exposes organisations to unforeseen threats. By working closely together with New York and supporting the global FinTech innovations aimed at targeting this problem, we can help safeguard our sector and better protect businesses and consumers.”

 The financial community was profoundly affected by the 9/11 attacks at the World Trade Center. As security threats evolve and cyber threats increase, the 9/11 Memorial & Museum officials announced to be proud to partner with industry leaders and support this conversation in the heart of the world’s financial industry. The cities of New York and London have already begun to take action through the Global Cyber Alliance (GCA), which was set up in 2015 to help fight cyber crime. Co-founded by the City of London Police and New York’s District Attorney’s Office, the initiative brings together an international cross-sector of organisations to help confront, address and prevent malicious cyber activity worldwide.

 London and the UK have seen a rapid rise in the number of cyber security firms being launched, due to the access of industry giants, financial services firms and talent. Companies working in cyber security are based across 17 clusters in the UK, including London, which is also home to CyLon, Europe’s first cyber security accelerator and incubator space. The British government is working closely with industry as well to protect business from attacks with the launch of its National Cyber Security Centre earlier this year.

  


