Digital Fineprint Celebrates 1 Year Anniversary and Announces First Profitable Quarter

October 3, 2017

London, UK, Oct 1st, 2017 – The London-based InsurTech startup continues its successful growth journey

 Digital Fineprint, a London-based InsurTech helping the insurance community turn social media data into insurance data, today celebrated its first birthday, coinciding with the news that it has closed its first profitable quarter, driven by strong uptake of its enterprise analytics solution. This marks the end of a year filled with significant developments for the business, which was recently named as one of the top five InsurTechs to watch.

 Commenting on this milestone, Founder and CEO Erik Abrahamsson said: “We are proud of what the team has accomplished since we launched the company. After winning ‘Best Fintech in the UK’, growing to a team of 8 and working with leading insurance companies, we are now in a strong position to use our positive cash flow to expand the business. We are therefore inviting new team members, partners and investors to join us on our exciting journey!”.

 After a soft start at Oxford University in the spring of 2016, Erik, along with Austin Wellbelove (CPO) moved from Oxford to London to launch the company full-time in October 2016. One year later, the team as grown to 8 and the list of clients includes some of the most successful insurance companies in the world.

 Sam Evans, Founder and Managing Partner at Eos Venture Partners, added his congratulations to the company: “Erik and the team at Digital Fineprint have done an amazing job in the past year. A great team, great product and their hard work is now paying off with strong traction in the marketplace. We’re looking forward to being part of, and supporting where we can, the next stage of the journey”.

 Erik finished by saying: “We want to direct a special thanks to our partners and clients, especially Hiscox, QBE, MetLife, Accenture and Allianz, for being so supportive and helping us build an outstanding company in such a short time. We look forward to a long and exciting future together!”

 The company is now raising its second investment round, which will see a number of existing investors recommitting to the new raise and being joined by new funding partners.

  

  

 For more information about Digital Fineprint, please visit: www.digitalfineprint.com


