GPS Managing Director wins prestigious Industry Achievement Award in 2017 Pay Awards

June 27, 2017

Global Processing Services (GPS), a leading payments processor, congratulates its Managing Director, Suresh Vaghjiani, on being named a recipient of the 2017 Industry Achievement Award in the annual Pay Awards.

 The award is the highest recognition Paybefore bestows on individuals in its annual industry awards, and this is the first time the accolade has been awarded to a recipient in Europe in its 11-year history. Three past recipients of the award served on this year’s judging panel.

 ‘This award is given to individuals who have worked tirelessly to advance the prepaid and emerging payments industry,” said Paybefore Editor-in-Chief Loraine DeBonis. ‘Specifically, Suresh’s efforts in pioneering many firsts in the industry as well as his work on behalf of industry associations to educate policymakers exemplify what this award is all about.’

 Suresh said: “I am extremely honoured and humbled to win this award and extend my sincere thanks to Paybefore and the judging panel. I am very grateful to be supported by a dynamic team at GPS that strongly encourages innovation and collaboration. It is this pioneering spirit that enables us to approach any challenge with the confidence that anything is possible for our clients and the industry.”

 Suresh has had a long and distinguished career in fintech. He championed a number of ‘firsts in the industry’ for issuers including the first PAN European SEPA license, first contactless watch in the UK and first prepaid contactless programme to launch in the UK and Germany.

 In 2014 Suresh was also the youngest elected advisory board member to join the emerging payments association. In recognition of his many outstanding achievements, Suresh was named a key influencer in the Prepaid Power 10 list and elected as an advisory member of the Emerging Payments Association that is helping shape the future landscape of the payments industry.

 Tony Kerr, CEO of GPS, said, “This is a well-deserved award we are proud to have Suresh as part of our growing world-class senior team. His passion for our business and leadership has helped GPS establish its position as ‘The PayTech Pioneer’. Suresh has also earned a position of trust in our industry from which he is positively influencing its long-term direction.

 About Global Processing ServicesGPS is the market leading processor for both established emerging payments companies and the most innovative fintech businesses; a PCI-DSS Level 1 Service Provider accredited globally by Visa and Mastercard, GPS offers a global solution with access to banking schemes such as BACS and SEPA.

 Sarah Broughton, Global Processing Services


