FINTECH Circle and China’s Global Fintech Lab announce Fintech Bridge Partnership between the UK and China

June 4, 2018

Empowering international business and investment deals with cross-border Fintech conferences, fintech competitions, awards and executive fintech education with courses from the FINTECH Circle Institute.

 FINTECH Circle, the global community of FinTech entrepreneurs, angel and VC investors, financial services professionals and FinTech thought-leaders and its FINTECH Circle Institute, announce at Money 20/20 Europe a strategic partnership with China’s Global Fintech Lab. Inspired by the International Fintech Conference organised by HM Treasury in London, FINTECH Circle sourced the best Western fintech companies with strong potential for the Chinese market.

 FINTECH Circle’s alumni companies Funding Xchange and Algo Dynamix which had also exhibited at HM Treasury’s International Fintech Conference in March 2018 were invited by the Global Fintech Lab to pitch to a Jury of global Fintech experts, banks, angel and VC investors in Hangzhou during the China FinMaker Competition hosted by the Municipal Government of Hangzhou in collaboration with a wide range of private sector and media partners. The UK company FundingXChange won the 1st prize among all international fintech firms and received a cash award of £20,000.

 Based on this successful collaboration FINTECH Circle and the Global FinTech Lab will host the 1st Fintech Bridge Conference in London in late 2018 to strengthen ties between mainland China, HK and the UK. London is a global financial centre and the largest exporter of financial services and the FX capital of the world. The FINTECH Bridge Conference will bring together finance and government leaders from mainland China, HK and the UK including top fintech VCs, entrepreneurs, banks, insurance companies, asset managers, tech giants and government representatives.

 This exclusive conference will celebrate award winning entrepreneurs, companies and investors during the Gala Dinner and encourage attendees to sign business and investment deals in the Deal Signing Boardroom in front of global media partners. The conference date will be revealed in summer 2018. Interested parties are invited to join the waiting list to be notified first.

 FINTECH Circle will also launch its comprehensive range of FINTECH Education Courses for the first time in China, in collaboration with the Fintech Academy of the Global Fintech Lab.  This new commitment by FINTECH Circle augments FINTECH Circle Institute’s mission to upskill finance services professionals by providing courses across all areas of financial technology innovation, such as FinTech foundation, InsurTech, WealthTech, RegTech, enterprise innovation, entrepreneurship, blockchain and Crypto Finance.

 FINTECH Circle and the Global Fintech Lab will work closely together to deliver best-in-class FinTech educational courses, via their FINTECH Circle Institute and the Global Fintech Lab, in addition to exploring new initiatives which strengthen the capabilities, proficiency and experience of financial professionals in China.  This unique partnership underscores the mutual commitment of FINTECH Circle and the Global Fintech Lab to develop an international centre of excellence for fintech collaboration, business development and a co-investment platform in China.

 Susanne Chishti, CEO of FINTECH Circle and the FINTECH Circle Institute, commented: “The UK and China are two global fintech hubs which have lots of things in common – a strong culture of entrepreneurship, an outstanding financial and technology talent pool, access to finance and a large customer base including some of the leading financial institutions globally. We are excited to work with China’s Global Fintech Lab to support Western fintech firms in their business development and fund-raising in China and partner with Chinese fintech firms in expanding their presence in the UK and Europe.”

 Tong Cao, Founder of the Global Fintech Lab and Chairman of Hande Fintech, said: “China represents the world’s largest fintech market and the financial sector’s interest in overseas fintech innovations is on the rise. We look forward to working with FINTECH Circle to connect startups, investors, financial institutions and key stakeholders in the fintech ecosystems of both China and UK, and to enable greater collaborations. Through the partnership, we will also bring in international fintech best practices and expertise to power the digital transformation of China’s financial industry.”

 

 About FINTECH Circle & the FINTECH Circle Institute

 FINTECH Circle is a global community of 120,000+ fintech entrepreneurs, angel and VC investors, financial services professionals and fintech thought-leaders, focusing on FinTech seed investing, education and enterprise innovation. FINTECH Circle’s CEO, Susanne Chishti, co-edited The FINTECH Book published by WILEY in 2016 which became the 1st globally crowd-sourced book on financial technology and a global bestseller across 107 countries in 5 languages. In May 2018 two new books launched: The WealthTECH Book focuses on the disruptive changes in the global investment/wealth management and private banking sector and The InsurTECH Book focuses on digital disruption and transformation across insurance, both published by Wiley.

 The FINTECH Circle Institute is a fintech learning platform, designed to empower finance professionals with the necessary digital skills to adapt to the rapidly changing industry. With board members ranging from traditional banks and FinTech experts, through to academics from leading universities, we offer courses on topics including WealthTECH/Robo-banking, InsurTECH, RegTECH, Blockchain, Artificial Intelligence, Enterprise Innovation and Startup methodologies. Every quarter new bite-size classes are released to ensure that members will have access to the latest FinTech insights and industry experts working on the most cutting-edge fintech innovations globally.

 About the Global Fintech Lab

 The Global FinTech Lab is jointly founded by Shenzhen Hande Science & Technology Sharing Laboratory Co. Ltd，Chinese University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Finance Institute, and Renmin University of China International Monetary Institute. The Lab focuses on cutting edge technologies and their applications in the financial service industry and supports fintech innovators and financial institutions through R&D, incubation, investment, and consultancy. Global FinTech Lab’s founder is Tong Cao who previously served as President of Tencent’s WeBank, Vice President of China CITIC Bank and Vice President of the Export–Import Bank of China. The team of Global FinTech Lab is composed of professionals with deep experience and background in banking, consultancy and academic research.

 The Fintech Innovations Institute is a learning platform of the Global FinTech Lab. The Institute provides fintech education programmes to entrepreneurs, finance professionals and bank executives in China. It offers online courses of a broad range of fintech topics, as well as tailor-made training and workshops for banks.

 China’s Global Fintech Lab is headquartered in Shenzhen, China. Shenzhen forms part of the Pearl River Delta megalopolis with Hong Kong and is also home to Tencent, the Chinese tech giant owning WeChat and mobile giants Huawei and ZTE with Alibaba and Baidu also present.


