UTRUST: Mass Crypto Payments

September 5, 2017

The initial fundraising precedes the first round of the public ICO that’s due to commence on September 20th, 2017 at 1400 (BST) with a higher cap set at US$4m. The fundraising aims to build a global payments platform with extensive cryptocurrency support, ensuring merchants and people who don’t have technical knowledge and experience can engage with Blockchain technology, trade cryptocurrencies and receive fiat currency.

 Nuno Correia, CEO, said: UTRUST aims to create an infrastructure that provides the benefits of fast, secure, convenient, and inexpensive cryptocurrency transactions alongside the world’s first cryptocurrency payment protections. Our goal is to democratise the world of altcoins and Blockchain technology to ensure that anyone can benefit from instantaneous, transparent and cost-effective transactions, irrespective of where they live and level of education.

 UTRUST will use the collected funds to establish key industry partnerships and develop the world’s first ready-to-use cryptocurrency payments platform. The ERC20 compatible tokens are created over the Ethereum protocol, and can be used as a means of exchange on UTRUST’s payment gateway along with other cryptocurrencies.

 UTRUST’s token can be used for making zero fee payments to the thousands of merchants accepting any cryptocurrency via UTRUST, and be traded against other currencies on supported exchange platforms. The company will allocate a certain portion of the revenues to buyback and reduce the number of tokens in circulation.

 Being a deflationary currency by design, the demand for UTRUST tokens will increase with time, which combined with buyback should lead to appreciation in its market value.

 About UTRUST

 With a team spanning corporate management, B2C start-ups, payments, blockchain development, law, finance, and more, UTRUST is the world’s first cryptocurrency payments platform to implement consumer protections on a mass scale.

 The company is building a global PayPal–like payments platform with extensive cryptocurrency support. UTRUST’s end goal is to provide all the benefits of fast, secure, convenient, and inexpensive cryptocurrency transactions, in tandem with the world’s first cryptocurrency payment protections, which consumers need to fully embrace blockchain technology en masse.

 The Team

 UTRUST is backed by a highly experienced team from various sectors including corporate management, startups, payments, cryptocurrency development, law, finance, and computer science.

 Some of the prominent members of the team include: Nuno Correia, CEO Nuno Correia is an early cryptocurrency investor who has been involved in the cryptomarkets since the beginning of 2011. Having founded multiple B2C businesses in the past, Correia has a background in Law and Marketing, and his passion lies in transforming the future of digital payments.

 Filipe Castro, CIO Filipe Castro holds a business degree from MSENG and is passionate about disruptive technologies.  He has experience developing electronic payment systems and other software solutions during the early days of his career. Castro is engaged in business development and strategic development of new ventures.

 Artur Goulão, CTO Artur Goulão comes with previous experience in the payments industry. He has previously donned the role of a CTO in one of leading digital payment platform and is currently serving as the Head of Development at a Swiss-based Cybersecurity company. With a background in computer science from IST and MIT, Goulão is well-acquainted with both classical and blockchain smart contract based approach.

 Roberto Machado, CPOFounder and Product Manager at several startups prior to UTRUST, he has been leading different teams to build highly-reliable software products, with a focus on the end user experience. Previously, he has worked together with major international companies such as AT&T, Betfair, Airtel, and Uphold, being responsible for the vision outline, goals and product strategy of solutions used by millions of users.

 Other significant team members include Luis Ferreira as Head of Engineering; Laura Esteves as Head of Operations; Joao Ferreira as Head of Design; Nick Olender as Head of Sales and Partnerships; and Francisco Baila as Product Designer. UTRUST has a team of software engineers like Miguel Palhas, Gabriel Poca, Ronaldo Sousa, Fernando Mendes, Bruno Azevedo, Pedro Costa, and Joao Justo.UTRUST’s diverse advisory team includes Francisco Maia, Francisco Cruz, Joao Paulo, Sergio Viana, Marc Howland, David Dryan, Daniel Pierce and Sascha Benz.

 

 Learn more about UTRUST at: https://utrust.io

 Read the UTRUST Whitepaper at: https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/utrust/UTRUST-whitepaper-v1.0.1.pdf 

 Learn more about UTRUST’s ICO at: https://utrust.io/ico

 Media Contact: John McLeod Founder, JEA Associates Ltd Tel: +44 7886920436 http://jeaassociates.com/ 


