Synechron acquires Hatstand

May 13, 2016

This acquisition further builds Synechron’s consulting capabilities for world-leading financial institutions in key areas such as cybersecurity, market data and risk and regulatory compliance.

 Synechron is focused on creating the financial services industry’s leading consulting and technology organisation; an organisation that is able to define and deliver solutions that address the most vexing business challenges brought about by a wave of new technologies. Synechron is helping global financial firms leverage innovations such as artificial intelligence, blockchain and digital.

 Hatstand’s capabilities bolster this vision by deepening Synechron’s existing consultancy services while adding data management expertise. Through a shared passion for innovation and a client-centric approach, the combined business proposition will offer financial services organisations access to expert, end-to-end solutions, delivered at scale in an agile and cost-effective manner.

 “All industries, and financial services in particular, are feeling the pressure to modernise and leverage new technologies to more effectively compete,” explains Faisal Husain, Chief Executive Officer of Synechron. “As a result, our clients are being forced to rethink their digital strategies. This acquisition addresses the growing need for expert consulting that offers leadership with innovation.”

 Brad O’Brien, Chief Executive Officer of Hatstand, added, “Becoming part of a company with Synechron’s global footprint and scale will add greater breadth of resources, richer expertise on projects, and true end-to-end service benefits.”

 Adam Bennett, President and Executive Chairman of Hatstand, said of the acquisition, “We share the same vision as Synechron, in terms of delivering the highest quality service and investing in our people. This move represents a natural next step in our continued growth, and we are looking forward to being able to offer our clients extended capabilities and reach.”


