Rainmaker Accelerator 2017: applications are now open!

December 20, 2016

Rainmaker Foundation’s six-month Accelerator programme exists to take organisations at a tipping point in their growth on to a entrepreneurial journey exists to build a bridge of innovation between the commercial and not-for-profit sectors. Using disruptive thinking from their rainmaker community and technology innovation, they help them answer the big questions on how to amplify their impact and future-proof their sustainability.

 The programme aims to bring disruptive innovation from the technology sector and integrate it with entrepreneurial thinking, eventually becoming non-profit organisations who want to scale. Rainmakers believe that if small charities with huge potential have access to the same vital resources and frameworks available to commercial start-ups, they will thrive.

 So why accelerate? 

 Charities are facing big challenges in an environment of reduced government funding and growing donor disillusion. Small charities have an even harder challenge in transforming their corners of the world while competing with their larger peers for visibility. Limited resources, skills and connections hinder their growth and stability.

 The Accelerator model has been wildly successful in the for-profit sector, enabling hundreds of thousands of startups to grow in a sustainable way. Rainmaker Foundation believe that if small charities with big potential have access to the same vital tools, frameworks and resources available to commercial startups: they will thrive.

 What are they looking for? 

 They are mainly looking for purpose driven companies who are purpose led, also companies who are innovative and are looking to implement change in this particular area and are willing to provide solutions which challenge current thinking in solving existing issues. They are also looking for strong values, and companies who are driven and act with transparency, passion and determination for the cause.

 KEY DATES:

 15th January 2017 – applications close

 Week commencing 23rd January 2017 – Selection Round 1, receive confirmation of interview

 7th February 2017 – Selection Round 2, attend interview

 Week commencing 20th February 2017 – Receive confirmation of your place on Rainmaker Accelerator

 Week commencing 6th March – Programme begins

 Applications are now open for Rainmaker Accelerator — APPLY HERE!

 Previous alumni have included: Working Chance, Orchid Project, Kent Refugee Action Network & Spark Inside.

 For more information: www.rainmakerfoundation.org/accelerator/


