Fintech Week

April 21, 2016

 

 What is Fintech week?
Fintech Week is the world’s largest Fintech-focused festival. It comprises a series of conferences, workshops, hackathons, meetups and drinks receptions. Each day we focus on a different topic and each evening we celebrate.

 What’s the big picture?
London has a thriving Fintech community. Our aim once again is to unite the world of Fintech in the world’s financial capital. Last year hundreds of people flew in to see what the buzz was about. We want to enhance the dialog between established multi-nationals, innovation firms, disruptive start-ups, government, media and investors. We are shining a spotlight on the leaders of the Fintech revolution. We love disruptive technology that creates positive change, so we’re celebrating it.

 What is the agenda for FTW 2016?
This year Fintech Week will start with a Blockchain Hackarthon Weekend, followed by 4 days of conferences focusing on important Fintech sectors such as Money and Payments, Capital Markets, Insurance Innovation, Security and Data and so on. Every conference day will also feature a small number of exhibitors. The 5th day is dedicated to workshops run by our partners. Every evening there will be an official meetup, networking event, or drinks reception taking place in various locations across the City of London and Canary Wharf.

 Why we should visit?
To get inspired, learn something, meet new clients, partners, developers, investors and find value for your business. Investors will benefit from having hundreds of startups all in one place.

 What is your team like?
We are rebels, consultants, strategist, marketeers, geeks and entrepreneurs who are happy to get involved in new products, services or industry transformation. From payments, to regulation to Blockchain, we’re either working on it or know who is. We’re a grassroots organisation, which means we start from the ground up and do things a bit differently.

 How did it start?
Our first event was a small tech Meetup at a pub 5 years ago. Since then we have been growing organically in London and have even began running conferences in New York, Hong Kong and San Francisco. The first Fintech Week was in 2014, in 2015 we scaled up and attracted delegates from across the globe, got some of the brightest minds in financial services on to our stage and ran a Blockchain Hackathon in Canary Wharf. In 2016 we expect our biggest year, yet.

 What is your vision?
Our aim was to create an “always-on” events company with dozens of meetups throughout the year, niche quarterly conference and large flagship events such as London Fintech Week and repeat the concept in other financial hubs around the globe. We’ve been over delivering everything we promised and we’re growing at a rate of about 200% year on year. We’re building one of the largest databases of innovators and disruptors in the financial services sector.

 What else are you doing?
Apart from running a number of conferences, hackathons, meetups and private events we also play match-maker to enterprise corporations and innovative start-ups. We also help design and enhance innovation and transformation programmes. Our team members come from diverse backgrounds so we’ve layered a transformation consulting offering on top of our events and world class network.

 Plans for the future?
Global expansion. Fintech Week New York, San Francisco and Hong Kong are already on the cards. Our Blockchain Conference is going to 8-10 cities per year now. We want to do a lot more in Asia in the Middle East as well. We’re always up for partnering to make our plans come to life. Get in touch if you’re interested.

  


