42% of UK businesses are more inclined to expand operations overseas since the Brexit vote and US election results

March 24, 2017

Emerging markets are becoming increasingly attractive to 63% of UK businesses, with 75% eyeing Dubai as an overseas business location to expand into

 As the nation awaits the triggering of ‘Article 50’, the uncertainty over Brexit is making UK businesses more open to overseas expansion, with 42% of UK businesses confessing to having more appetite now than previously to expand their business presence overseas, according to a new research released today by the DMCC, a Dubai Government entity on trade and enterprise.

 Amongst the top reasons for UK businesses eyeing overseas expansion, include: emerging markets becoming increasingly attractive (63%), growing business need for global presence (47%), availability and wealth of overseas talent (44%), and too much uncertainty in the markets with the UK no longer being an attractive option (36%).

 Out of the UK businesses open to expanding into overseas markets, a staggering 75% say they are eyeing Dubai as a possible overseas location to expand into. And out of the UK businesses that are still undecided, 40% say they would consider the Middle East as a territory to have presence in if they are open to overseas business expansion.

 And amongst the UK businesses that are still hesitant about overseas expansion, 34% say it is because their business is not applicable for an overseas market, however certain features could make it more attractive for them to consider overseas business expansion. For 43% of UK businesses, tax free incentives would make it more attractive to expand into overseas markets, and for 29%, the ease at which they can arrange paperwork (trade license, visas, office space) would help them consider an overseas expansion.

 We have on hand the CEO of the DMCC, Gautam Sashittal who will discuss how the Dubai Multi Commodities Centre is offering help to UK businesses looking to expand overseas into the Middle East market (VIDEO).

  

 About DMCC

 DMCC is an authority on trade, enterprise and commodities in Dubai. We facilitate trade through our Free Zone, the UAE’s largest and fastest growing, with over 13,000 member companies; commodity exchanges like the Dubai Gold & Commodity Exchange (DGCX); legal and regulatory frameworks; and our real estate offering.  We are also developing the ‘Burj2020 District’ as part of our DMCC expansion strategy to provide businesses with a commercial property offering unique to the Dubai marketplace. Awarded the Global Free Zone of the Year by the Financial Times fDi magazine, DMCC is an ideal place to set up a company quickly and grow business beyond Dubai’s borders providing a global gateway for trade.

 DMCC. Made for Trade.

  


