Yoyo Wallet powers Caffè Nero’s first mobile payment & loyalty app across all stores nationwide

April 17, 2017

First UK coffee brand app to offer straight-through payment, automated loyalty collection & digital receipts in one. Yoyo Wallet – the UK’s fastest growing mobile wallet – and Caffè Nero launch the coffee brand’s first mobile payment and loyalty app in a bid to take its iconic blue stamp card into the digital age.

 The iOS and Android-available app, which can be used in all Caffè Nero stores across the UK and Ireland, will provide a digital version of Caffè Nero’s iconic blue paper stamp card, which has been in circulation since 1997 and rewards customers with their 10th coffee free. The card is used by nine million customers yearly, collecting in excess of 50 million stamps.

 The new Caffè Nero app will be the first UK coffee app to go beyond ‘top-up’, offering the ease of straight-through payment, automated loyalty stamp collection and digital receipts – in one quick scan.

 Yoyo Wallet, whose own mobile payment and customer engagement app is used in universities, corporate locations and on high streets across the UK, partnered with Caffè Nero to build and power the app. Existing Yoyo Wallet app users will also be able to pay and collect their loyalty stamps at every Caffè Nero store.

 As well as improving the in-store customer experience, the partnership with Yoyo Wallet will allow the coffee brand to identify every customer at the point-of-sale. This provides invaluable insight into purchasing behaviours, while also informing the app’s personalised engagement and rewards experience.

 The app also helps to tackle the industry-wide issue of lost loyalty with five million Caffè Nero loyalty stamps and 500,000 coffees thought to be going unredeemed each year. Furthermore, according to a new survey by Yoyo Wallet more than 87 million loyalty cards are lost every year.

 Falys from Yoyo Wallet added: “We have every confidence that the move from the paper loyalty card to the app will contribute to a significant increase in customer loyalty for the retailer, driving a huge spike in loyalty stamp redemption.”

 The launch of the Caffè Nero app follows a host of achievements for Yoyo Wallet, whose app continues to grow across the UK. Yoyo Wallet is now accepted in half of UK universities, hundreds of corporate sites and other well known high street retailers, including Planet Organic.


