Huge Thing has started 4th batch of acceleration program powered by Alior Bank SA

June 7, 2017

Huge Thing is Warsaw-based acceleration program, focused on seed stage projects with international ambitions. Program was inaugurated in 2012 by SpeedUp Venture Capital Group. To date, 41 teams altogether have attended editions of the program. Their participants have worked under the supervision of mentors from companies and organizations such as 500 Startups, Google, Microsoft, Allegro, and Wiseguys

 The fourth edition of Huge Thing is carried out in cooperation with Alior Bank within the ScaleUp program – supported by the Polish Agency for Enterprise Development. The goal of the entire program is the commercialization of projects with the highest potential; meaning, initializing market sales of new products or technology licenses, in cooperation with the program’s partners.

 For this batch Huge Thing has chosen 9 startups that will spend 16 weeks intensively working on their projects. In acceleration program there are taking part startups from Poland, Ukraine, Croatia, Montenegro and Great Britain.  It’s the first time when Huge Thing support qualified teams with equity free money (up to 45K euro to get!).

 During acceleration program startups will conduct the customer development process, meet prospective clients, identify their target groups, and educate themselves on techniques regarding presenting to their customers, and design thinking. It will be also a time for teams to set up goals to be achieved during the program.

 Also, there are planned two abroad visits in London and Berlin (where teams will get to know local startup scenes and participate in meetings with potential partners). Additionally, there will be organized a Speed Dating with investors during the program.

 The program will finish 20th of September with official event – Demo Day. Final event creates a possibility for startups to  present yourself in front of investors, and offers a chance to meet new business partners.

 The next batch of Huge Thing acceleration program will start in December. More information about program can find on www.hugething.vc

 List of startups, which take part in 4th edition.

 AtticLab – Initially, they introduced the openbankit – a free open-source blockchain-based platform for e-money and digital assets management. But in process of communication with program members, they decided to transform the project in Qrify – the Blockchain based system aiming to attract more customers to the bank.

 BillTech – They built a platform  that automates bill payments. Their idea is always to keep the bill payments free, however they plan to monetize on complementary services like payment deferment (short-term loan offering) and product cross-selling (tailored deals for users).

 BmyBit – has developed a Personal Automated Trading System (PATS). PATS makes automated trading with digital assets available for everyone. It uses APIs to gather a number of liquidity providers, which creates no limits on scalability

 bNesis – streamlines API integrations and teaches banking systems, even if it is legacy ones, “to talk” to billing, payment, financial and systems of other banks simplifying and automating data transfer between them

 Boson –  aims to create an ecosystem of global digital identities and a blockchain-based protocol allowing multiple points of user verification. The goal is to allow any community-trusted entities such as governments, telecoms, banks, etc. to provide you with a verified internet identity usable to conduct business in the whole world, not only the country of origin.

 Gleep – voice conferencing AI agent that removes the pain of doing conference calls. It will save you massive amount of time by automatically create a transcript, extract keywords and action points and make a summary of the call, who said what and when. It will allow you to search through thousands of audio calls like you would search on google and find out who said what and who promised what.

 Lendguru – helps SMEs optimize their finances. Their goal is to provide business owners with CFO at click-distance service, giving actionable advice and forecast-based decision-making tools for financial management. They have developed a dashboard, which provides information on the current cash standing of the company and benchmarks against the industry.

 More Money  – AI based personal finance assistant that helps you pay less for your telco and banking services. They offer a simple and easy to use solution using artificial intelligence and chat-based interface.

 Positiverse –  provides the myConsents solution which eases compliance with the new EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and equips companies with a reliable, secure and tamper-proof consents management system. We aim to enable companies and institutions to build a more engaged relationship with customers through presenting high respect to the customers’ privacy rights.


