Dublin’s fintech community primed to take advantage of post-Brexit opportunities

January 30, 2018

For some time, Dublin has been a hub for American financial firms to base themselves for their European operations. Following Brexit, Dublin is even better positioned to fulfil this status, and the fintech community will be looking to join this focus,” said Chris Skinner, the world-renowned fintech and financial services expert and commentator, discussing the opportunities for Ireland in the global fintech sector at Enterprise Ireland’s Future of Fintech event at Dogpatch Labs, Dublin today.

 “Firms like Leveris are already stand-out Irish start-up companies, as are others. Equally, the Collison brothers who created Stripe have proven that the vision for a new financial future built in Ireland is incredibly strong. Long may it continue,” said Chris Skinner.

 More than 100 leaders, collaborators and disruptors from international banking and fintech hubs such as New York, Singapore, Sydney, Toronto and Mumbai, convened in Dublin today for Enterprise Ireland’s Future of Fintech event, to meet, discuss and debate the global future landscape. Delegates also had the opportunity to meet Enterprise Ireland fintech client companies to discuss prospects for further collaboration.

 The conference plays an important role in Ireland’s strategy to develop the financial services and technology sector.

 Opening Enterprise Ireland’s Future of Fintech event, the Minister of State for Financial Services and Insurance, Michael D’Arcy TD said: “Enterprise Ireland’s Future of Fintech event is an important platform to promote Ireland as a world-class provider of innovative financial products and services internationally, promoting Irish Fintech solutions to international buyers. Positioning Ireland in the global Fintech marketplace is a focus of the Government’s IFS2020 Action Plan for 2018, full details of which I will be announcing later today.”

 Giles O’Neill, Head of Fintech at Enterprise Ireland said: “With 200 Enterprise Ireland client companies, employing nearly 10,000 people at the end of 2017, Irish companies are achieving significant impact in international markets, exporting to 100 countries and achieving sales of over €1 billion in 2017. These Irish companies offer innovative solutions and services in payments, regulatory technologies and broader Fintech applications across the world. They have achieved this by investing and innovating to understand the Fintech market and, correspondingly, meeting the requirements of some of the toughest professional procurement and business teams and institutions in the world.”

 About Enterprise Ireland:

 Enterprise Ireland is Ireland’s national export agency, responsible for the development and growth of Irish enterprises in world markets

 With over 30 offices worldwide, our local sectoral specialists work with international customers to understand their unique challenges and match them with Irish suppliers that can deliver leading edge products and services.

 Our goal is to simplify and enhance the purchase process for international customers and build successful, long-term business relationships between international companies and Irish suppliers.

 About Ireland’s Fintech Sector:

 Ireland is a globally-recognised centre for specialist International Financial Services (IFS). Enterprise Ireland, the agency with responsibility for the development of Irish-owned businesses internationally, has over 200 clients operating in the IFS space, including start-ups, scaling, and large multinational Irish companies, a significant number of whom are based regionally. These companies combined employed nearly 10,000 people at the end of 2017 and are exporting to over 100 countries worldwide, with sales exceeding €1 billion in 2017. The UK and North American markets are important markets, with Europe and Asia Pacific, featuring strongly in export figures last year.

  


