Young British companies get lifted with SyndicateRoom

June 15, 2017

Online investment platform SyndicateRoom today announces the closure of two lift rounds, for Peptinnovate and Alert Technology.

 SyndicateRoom negotiated an exclusive offer with the companies, whereby its members could participate in the equity rounds. Pekama closed its round in overfunding over the weekend.

 Peptinnovate raised £2.7 million, Alert achieved £1 million and Pekama secured £600,000. Funds from all three rounds bring the total value of all three raises to £4.3 million.Lead investor and equity funding scheme, Discovery Park Technology Investments LP, contributed to Peptinnovate and Alert Technology. Managed by NCL Innovation and supported by Kent County Council and the Regional Growth Fund, the company is committed to helping cutting-edge science and technology firms get their products or treatments to market. Peptinnovate is a drug development company developing animmune regulating therapy for asthma.

 Richard Nagle, CEO, Peptinnovate, commented: “Peptinnovate’s products have the ability to significantly advance the control and management of moderate to severe chronic inflammatory diseases, with the potential for immune regulation and remission. We wanted to raise additional capital to accelerate the development of our lead asset through clinical trials.”

 Alert Technology has developed a portable real-time warning device which help minimise the risk of unintentional exposure to deadly airborne asbestos fibres in workplaces. The device, named ALERT, is ALERT is said to be the world’s first warning device able to distinguish between asbestos and non-asbestos fibres.

 “Despite the fact that asbestos is a category one human carcinogen with no safe level of exposure, disease caused by asbestos is a global and growing issue. Included in more than 3,500 products around the world, asbestos affects a wide range of industries, from all types of construction through the schools and government buildings,” said Alan Archer, Founder and Managing Director, Alert Technology. “We were looking for a sophisticated investment platform which connect us to ambitious investors and SyndicateRoom has provided just that.”

 Finally, legal tech company, Pekama, also closed its raise in overfunding with SyndicateRoom. Pekama’s digital platform connects lawyers from different jurisdictions all over the world, providing them with the data they need to make decisions to optimise revenue streams, helping them build a more sustainable, and profitable, business. “We’re seeing an ever-increasing number of companies coming to the SyndicateRoom platform for lift rounds and overfunding,” commented Gonçalo de Vasconcelos, CEO and founder, SyndicateRoom. “

 These ‘top-ups’ are attractive to investors as they carry the certainty that the funding round is already complete and has had strong interest from others. There is also a real benefit to companies as they are able to extend the amount of capital raised quickly and easily via the platform. Importantly, we’re offering choice, for both members and entrepreneurs.”


