Spotcap Announces The UK’s First Fintech Fellowship Winner! 

September 27, 2017

London, United Kingdom – September 26, 2017, 9am BST – Spotcap today announced Mohammed Hussan as the winner of its Fintech Fellowship 2017. The first of its kind in the UK, the Fellowship awards one aspiring masters or MBA student with a £8k stipend towards their studies.

 The fintech sector is one of the UK’s fastest growing, adding more than £6.6 billion to the economy and attracting more than £500 million of investment. Its continued success is closely connected to access to talent, in the short- as well as long-term.

 A recent graduate from Durham University with a First-Class honours degree in Electronic Engineering, Mohammed will use the Fellowship to support his MSc in Computer Science at Imperial College London, commencing this October. At Imperial, he will continue to pursue his interest in the intersection of finance and technology, which he has begun to explore through work experience at an innovation lab and traditional financial institution.

 Commenting on the win, Mohammed Hussan said, “Seeing positive collaboration between groups of talented entrepreneurs and established financial corporations really inspired me to apply. I have an interest in fintech’s transformative potential for individuals and communities. I believe it is a game-changer.”

 Helping fill the talent gap

 The need for talent has been highlighted by a recent census of UK fintech firms by EY and Innovate Finance, which identified access to talent, particularly coding and software development, as one of the biggest issues that need to be addressed for continued growth.

 “We congratulate Mohammed on his achievements so far,” said Niels Turfboer, Managing Director Spotcap UK. “By providing support at a pivotal moment in his professional journey, we hope to help encourage him and other talented young people to consider a career in fintech.”

 Forty-two universities backed the initiative, sharing information about the fellowship with their incoming classes. Based on the interest and uptake in the UK, it has also been launched in the Netherlands and Australia.

 Spotcap will reopen the UK fellowship for a new pool of applicants in April 2018. For more details, visit our dedicated site: https://www.spotcap.co.uk/fintech-fellowship/.

 About Spotcap

 Spotcap provides flexible and accessible small business financing, allowing entrepreneurs to focus on what matters – their business. We developed our credit risk algorithm in-house and lend from our own balance-sheet.

 Headquartered in Berlin, Germany, Spotcap launched in Spain in 2014 before expanding to the Netherlands and Australia in 2015, the UK in 2016 and New Zealand in 2017. The company is led by Founder and CEO Jens Woloszczak and Niels Turfboer, who is the Managing Director of Benelux and UK.

 The growing team currently consists of more than 120 employees. Spotcap investors include Rocket Internet, Finstar Financial Group, Access Industries, Holtzbrinck Ventures, Kreos Capital and Heartland Bank.

 Read more about Spotcap: https://www.spotcap.co.uk/

  


