Polish Tech Day 2017

June 2, 2017

What will be the consequences of Brexit for the business relations between Poland and UK? What is the future of British financial sector and what can it learn from Polish pioneers of digital banking? How are the professional opportunities in CEE changing? You’ll learn the answers to these questions at Polish Tech Day in London, the largest event dedicated to Polish new technologies outside of Poland.

 The third edition of this event is held on 16th of June during the London Technology Week and gathers in one place (at Google office) leaders of Polish and British tech and finance ecosystem interested in collaboration between the two countries, from managers of global corporations, to bilateral trade organisations and startups.

 The main part of the event will be discussion panels. In one of the most interesting panels, Wojciech Chmielewski (mAccelerator) will talk with Paul Clark (Tandem Bank) about the digital banking revolution that Chmielewski helped lead in Poland and that Tandem Bank is about to bring to the UK. You will learn what doing business in Poland looks like, in a panel hosted by Startup Poland, while panel hosted by Association of Business Service Leaders in Poland and Global Sourcing Association will explore why making your next career move in the CEE region is wise, and not only if you’re Polish or affected by Brexit.

 The third edition of Polish Tech Day is also a great opportunity to meet the hottest Polish start-ups. After last year’s success, Pitch to London, a pitching competition for Polish start-ups, is again a part of this year’s edition of Polish Tech Day. Participants, chosen among the winners of the most prestigious Polish start-up competitions (such as Wolves Summit, infoShare or ABSL Startup Challenge) will have a unique opportunity to pitch their ideas to a panel of British investors (such as Ajay Chowdhury) and accelerators (such as AngelsCube).

 All start-ups taking part in Polish Tech Day will also have the chance to exchange their experiences and receive professional advice. The 2016 edition’s winner, SaaSMgr, received a startup growth pack worth £30.000.

 The pitching startups will also get a chance to find inspiration and learn from those who already gained major international traction. Zortrax, HotelOga, GameKit and Netguru will take part in #GoGlobal panel hosted by Michał Kramarz from Google, while Disrupting London panel, hosted by Deloitte, will gather some of the most interesting Polish FinTech startups.

 The success of the last two Polish Tech Day events confirms a need for building a global network of Polish tech professionals. “I’m very proud and happy that Polish Tech Day and our monthly meetups in London meet this need, allowing Polish technopreneurs and tech professionals make valuable connections within international markets.” – says Jacek Ratajczak, the founder of Polish Tech Link, and organiser of Polish Tech Day.

 Polish Tech Day 2017 is organised in partnership with the Trade and Investment Promotion Unit of the Polish Embassy in London (WPHI).

 Due to limited capacity of the venue, this event is invitation only. To apply for an invitation, please register your interest in attending the Polish Tech Day here

 You can watch the video from last year here:

 


