Russian-British Business Forum «Partnerships for growth. New strategies»

November 21, 2016

Eastern Seasons present an annual Russian-British Business Forum organised by The Russian Trade Delegation, in cooperation with the Ministry of Economic Development of the Russian Federation. It provides a unique platform for Europe’s most pow-erful business and finance officials to discuss the challenges now facing the international community. The Business Forum aims to enhance, promote and consolidate the British-Russian cooperation in terms of trade, investment and economy.

 Daniel Kawczynski, a Conservative MP, Vice-chair of the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Russia, and a member of the Foreign Affairs Select Committee, is currently undertaking a report into Britain’s Relations with Russia. His keynote will deliver a message to the business community: that we must build up Anglo-Russian relations and work together for trade and business. His report will seek to draw on the views of experts to scrutinise cur-rent British Foreign Policy in regards to Russia.

  

 Daniel Kawczynski made the following statement ahead of the Forum:

  

 Both countries share the same goal – to exist in peace, to work as allies on mutual goals, to cooperate in politics, economics and culture fields. Essentially, to treat each other’s nations with dignity and respect. The Russian Ambassador, Alexander Yakovenko, says:

 The Forum has been established to critically assess the medium-to-long term investment and trade climate between the UK and Russia. Showcasing expert case studies and pan-els it will provide an exceptional opportunity for participants to identify and develop their commercial projects. With over 200 attendees and 50 spokespeople attending, it will represent a wide range of industries and interests at governmental and corporate level. Aside from expert led panels, the Forum will also bring together senior-level decision makers, attendees and representatives of both British and Russian organisations to network and debate the key issues affecting the economy and business environment today.

 The Forum will consist of five panel sessions:

 • The interaction of government bodies and development institutions of Russia and the UK for facilitation of bilateral collaboration

 • The role of financial institutions and assessment of support of export activities in the two countries

 • Trends, challenges and prospects of Russian and British cooperation

 • FinTech collaboration; Digital transformation and new business models. International data exchange; Cloud computing and network security challenges; Cyber security and online fraud

 • Investment and business climate in Russia (Regional opportunities); 2018 FIFA World Cup presentation

  

 The Russian-British Business Forum will also provide a great opportunity to consolidate existing or establish new business dialogues through pre-arranged B2B and B2G meet-ings both during and after the Forum. Amongst notable speakers and participants:

 Tatyana Valovaya, Member of the Board – Minister in charge of Integration and Macro-economics, Eurasian Economic Commission (EEC)

 Sir Edward Leigh MP (Conservative), Chairman, All-Party Parliamentary Russia Group

 Daniel Kaczynski MP (Conservative), Vice-chair, All-Party Parliamentary Russia Group. He is also a member of the Foreign Affairs Select Committee

 Jonathan Brenton, Minister Counsellor British Embassy in Moscow

 Anatoliy Aksakov, Chairman of the State Duma Committee on Financial Markets

 Andrey Nikitin, Chief Executive Officer, Agency for Strategic Initiatives

 Adrian McDonald, President, Dell EMC

 Kirill Slavin, Managing Director, Kaspersky Lab UK and Ireland

 Dmitry Politov, Director, International Relations Department, Skolkovo Foundation

 Georgi Yordanov, Director, Head of Public Sector CEE, Turkey & Israel, Citi Bank

 Philip Bouverat, Director of External Affairs, JCB

  

 Russian-British Business Forum «Partnerships for growth. New Strategies»

 A pioneering business platform dedicated to strengthening trade and investment relations between the UK and Russia through the cultivation of economic partnerships

 The Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre,
Broad Sanctuary, Westminster,
London SW1P 3EE November 30, 2016

  

 Tickets available here: www.easternseasons.com or www.rustrade.org.uk

 For more information about Eastern Seasons please contact Daria Gonciarenko at daria@curzonpr.com


