The Mobile Media Summit in London

November 16, 2015

The current concord is that brands, agencies, publishers, and just about any business should be taking a ‘mobile first’ approach. The fact is that mobile technology has swept like rapid fire throughout
the world, in a short amount of time.  It may not be the easiest approach. But we have long moved past several generations of the device we once used for the simple task of making a call. It became ‘smart’, and it is only getting ‘smarter’ with each passing month. In more recent years, we saw the rise of tablets, swiftly followed by ‘wearable tech’. The ubiquity of mobile in all phases of our media consumption, has brought about broad implications. Changing the fundamental meaning of sales, marketing and communications. And the function of our society. It’s about time we defined mobile media and understood the evolution of communication technologies. To adapt our creativity, and produce those ‘thumb-stopping’ moments.

 The summit started with a panel consisting of 5 speakers. 3 of whom have recently been listed on Drum’s annual Top 50 most influential players in mobile marketing. Followed by McCANN’s Jon Carney, talking about the future of ad/marketing agencies. I am crestfallen to have missed this part of the summit.

 

 However, the general consensus following the panel indicated that:

 Carney announced that mobile is only in its infancy stage. He also confided that the three parts of the future marketing agencies are Data – Drivers – Storytelling. (Thanks McCANN, for the news from 2013)

 (What is the equivalence of 8.33 human years to ‘tech years’?  I’d like to know!)

 After a break, we met again with 5 panelist, including Drum list’s James Hilton, Global CEO and Founder of M&C Saatchi Mobile and Dan Rosen, the Global Director of Advertising, Telefónica.  

 

 This part of the panel was focussed on the vast contextual data that mobile unlocks. The consumers are willing to share all their details, personal or otherwise, in exchange for a social platform. It is not unethical for the marketer to take this data and produce targeted campaigns.

 When the question “how hazardous is the ‘watch and get’ trend on mobile for marketers?” had risen. There was no imminent revelation. The simple and plain answer came from James Hilton “customers say one thing and do another.” It’s simple. If you don’t want the ad, buy the app.

  

 Shop Direct ‘s Jonathan Wall followed the panel with a presentation that stressed the importance of optimizing on user experience. The presentation eloquently illustrated why UX is the key to any strategy.

 

 Here was the big ‘revelation’: consumers have a lot less patience! The brand that fails to catch on will be left behind.

 Has the rise of infographics, storytelling and meme’s in the past few years taught us nothing? People want to consume as much information as possible, with as little effort as possible. They want to be entertained, and informed at the same time. And if you can’t provide it, they will find someone who will. Better yet, they will do it themselves, talk about your product. With a mobile.

 The media fragmentation and the eruption of self-producers (personalized media). The rise of social platforms.
The swift shifts of the digital landscape. These are all aspects that make it virtually impossible for marketers to keep up.
Marketers rely on mountains of data to customize and deliver the right content at the right time, to the right person, in the right context. We are no longer talking solely about the monitoring of social updates and search queries. Digital marketers have to monetize on the data gathered from multiple channels and devices.

 The fundamentals of programmatic marketing are:

 The majority of consumers today are 51% more likely to consume through their mobile screen than a desktop or any other form of media.

 And as I set there, wondering if everyone had missed the Web summit, Gregory Roekens, CTO of AMV BBDO went up on that stage accompanied by a white slide with a massive I AI.

 Followed by a picture of him on a hover-board as he sets the dinner table. And tells us that he was talking to Siri. Telling it to turn the lights, on through his AppleWatch. Finally, an agency that was talking in the present tense. But that is worthy of its own article. 

 To be continued…

  


