Credium’s New Platform To Bridge Between The Traditional Credit Industry And Crypto Economy

06 Feb 2018

Credium’s Innovative Solution Will Allow Any Credit Entity Holding And Buying Non Securitized Debt To Accurately Price And Exchange Their Credit Assets In A Blockchain Based Marketplace
In the past decade, Fintech companies made it easier than ever to invest in credit assets, but an efficient cross-platform market for selling these assets did not exist. Investors were locked up for years with no liquidity options.
Credium’s innovative solution will allow any credit entity holding and buying non securitized debt to accurately price and exchange their credit assets in a Blockchain based marketplace. This will revolutionize the way assets move within the credit industry, making it more efficient and transparent.
“Credit is the world’s most important financial engine. It drives global growth both commercially and personally, but its investors still suffer from huge pain-point. While buying non-securitized credit assets is easier than ever, selling them is still very limited, cumbersome, costly and heavily intermediated.”
Gilad Woltsovitch
Credium’s solution will be the fuel for this extremely important financial engine, driving liquidity to the credit markets. By tokenizing credit assets and making them tradable, based on a shared transparent and immutable ledger, Credium allows credit issuers to gain broader investor trust. “We are excited to create the credit industry’s next generation infrastructure, while allowing the credit industry to securely exchange data and assets under a unified protocol,” says Gilad Woltsovich, Credium’s Co-Founder and CEO.
Credium was founded in 2016, it has offices in Tel aviv, New York and San Francisco and is being led by a team of serial entrepreneurs from the Blockchain and Fintech industry and exports in Finance and Marketing.
Meet the founders:
Gilad Woltsovich , Co-Founder and CEO. Woltsovich has also Co-Founded Backed – a disruptive lending platform designed for millennials and aimed to reduce customers rates by up to 40%. Woltsovich is also an early investor and community builder of the Ethereum project.
Kfir Moyal
Kfir Hod Moyal, Chairman, Co-Founder of Matomy media (IPO’d in 2014 at the London stock exchange) and GP / Co-Founder at Cyhawk ventures.
Dan Eblagon – a Marketing and Advertising veteran who served as the Head of Digital at Grey Tel Aviv (after merging his agency to the Grey Group).
Credium’s board of advisors includes big industry names, such as Yoni Assia, eToro Co-Founder and an international Crypto leader, Eyal hertzog, Product Architect at Bancor and a world-leading Tokenomist, Elan amir, Chief Product Officer at Prosper, Mihai Cucuringu from the University of Oxford and Raphael Ouzan, Co-Founder of Billguard (acquired by Prosper) and a Blockchain infrastructure expert.


