Innovative Blockchain Application Technology On Advancements With Ted Danson

17 May 2018

DMG Productions uncovers the latest advances in blockchain technology
The Advancements television series will explore the latest advances in blockchain technology applications and solutions, airing on Sunday, May 20th at 4:30pmET on CNBC. Check your local listings for more information.
The show will focus on Draglet, a blockchain service provider with years of experience, dating back to the beginning of Bitcoin and Ethereum technology. Viewers will learn how draglet’s initial coin offering platform differs from other standard implementations, and will be educated about real smart contracts applications, as well as its white-label exchange software, which is currently utilized by over 20 cryptocurrency exchanges worldwide.
Benjamin Bommhardt
Michael Devine
“Blockchain technology is currently disrupting the world on a global scale. New innovations emerge on a weekly or even daily basis which altogether propels the cryptocurrency industry to reach new heights. We are fortunate to have been involved in the crypto business for such a “long” time and therefore are very excited about how things have been developing this year. Taking part in the Advancements series is an honor for us. It is the icing on the cake and we are very happy that we have been given the opportunity to work with such a renowned production company and tell the world more about what we do,” said Benjamin Bommhardt, Sales Director at draglet.
“With customizable exchange software, the experienced experts at draglet specialize in developing tailored blockchain powered applications,” said Michael Devine, senior producer and content development lead for the Advancements series. “We look forward to exploring this topic.”
draglet is a Blockchain service provider drawing on years of experience since the beginning of Bitcoin and Ethereum technology.
This is what the company has to say about itself: Based in Munich, Bavaria, we deliver our Blockchain expertise to enterprises worldwide. Need help with Smart Contract applications? We got you. Want to create Digital Tokens for real world assets? We assist you with the implementation and development. Or maybe you want to set up your own White-label Bitcoin Exchange? No problem with our customizable Exchange Software. Our experienced experts specialize in developing tailored blockchain powered applications.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive


