SAP S/4HANA® Cloud Trail Blazes AI-Powered Innovation To Help Customers Build Intelligent Enterprises

04 Jun 2018

SAP SE today announced that nine out of 10 business leaders believe artificial intelligence (AI) is critical for their companies’ survival over the next five years, according to a survey of 2,500 C-level executives.
The survey – conducted by SAP in Australia, France, Germany, United Kingdom and the United States – showed that business leaders are ready to act on this acknowledgement, revealing growing market momentum for AI-powered innovation.
Six out of 10 business leaders polled have implemented or are planning to implement AI in the next year.
A third of business leaders polled are planning to make serious investments (between US$500,000 and $5 million) in AI in the next 12 months.
Read More: Interview With Sam Kim, CEO, Lucidity
Bernd Leukert
“We want to automate half of all ERP business processes within the next three years using AI-powered functionality,” said Bernd Leukert, member of the Executive Board of SAP SE, Products & Innovation. “SAP S/4HANA Cloud is the only product in the ERP market to give companies the breadth and depth of intelligence they need to leapfrog their competitors to stay on top of their game.”
SAP S/4HANA® Cloud: The Most Intelligent ERP Offering in the Market Today
SAP is taking the lead in making AI a core foundational enhancement of its enterprise offerings. While others may claim intelligence, SAP S/4HANA® Cloud is the only tried and true intelligent ERP solution with the following benefits in the market today:
Read More: Interview With Sam Kim, CEO, Lucidity
Hands-free, conversational user experience: SAP S/4HANA Cloud brings the first digital-age, conversational user experience to the ERP software market by integrating with the SAP® CoPilot digital assistant. The intelligent digital assistant for the enterprise from SAP allows users to interact with their ERP software on more social and human terms. As such, SAP S/4HANA Cloud is the world’s first hands-free ERP solution that is fundamentally changing the way customers interact with, and extract value from, their ERP software.
AI-powered automation: SAP S/4HANA Cloud gives customers the deepest and broadest AI-powered set of functionalities in the ERP market today. Infused with intelligent, self-learning mechanisms, SAP S/4HANA Cloud is redefining the way work is being done. For example, with the latest release of SAP S/4HANA Cloud, project managers now can take advantage of AI-powered project cost forecasting capabilities to reduce budget overruns and make more accurate resource investment decisions.
Next-generation business processes: SAP S/4HANA Cloud has redefined business processes by combining years of industry expertise with the power of the latest technology innovations, such as AI and in-memory computing technology. Today, a retailer can use dynamic pricing to intelligently adjust prices according to demand. A business manager can tap into staffing predictions based on the requirements and status of a given project or job. These are just two examples of how customers can benefit from next-generation business processes unlocked by SAP S/4HANA Cloud.
Read More: Interview With Alexandre Debecker, Chief Growth Officer – Ubisend
SAP S/4HANA Cloud Enables the Intelligent Enterprise for Customers
Customers such as La Liga, pladis global, Royal Dutch Shell plc and Beyond Technologies will be present at the SAPPHIRE NOW® conference taking place June 5–7, 2018. They will discuss their “intelligent enterprise” transformation enabled by SAP S/4HANA Cloud.
José Guerra Alvarez
La Liga, the top professional association football division of the Spanish football league system, is using SAP S/4HANA Cloud to transform into an intelligent enterprise. To fulfill its ambition to expand into the global entertainment sector, the company needed to overhaul its dated, complex and manual business processes.
“We have been growing rapidly over the last few years. As we make the leap to become a global entertainment brand, we need the newest technologies and the implementation of a suite of solutions to meet all of our objectives,” said José Guerra, head of corporate operations, La Liga. “We see SAP as a key solution provider to help us achieve them, and we are confident that this relationship will bring to our operations two main benefits: enhanced business processes and quicker innovation cycles.”
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive


