Pega Independent Software Vendor Program Unveiled To Bring Innovative Solutions To Clients

07 Jun 2018

The New Program Expands Pega’s Ecosystem by Enabling Partners to Create Pega-Based Solutions in an Open Development Environment
At the Pega World 2018, Pegasystems Inc., a leading martech company for customer engagement, announced the launch of the Pega Independent Software Vendor (ISV) program. For the first time, Pega is enabling independent development on its next-generation digital transformation suite, Pega Infinity™, so partners can easily integrate with and build new solutions that answer specific market needs. ISVs will also benefit from a commercial go-to-market model to help raise awareness of their solutions to potential clients.
Read More: Interview With Sam Kim, CEO, Lucidity
Pega Independent Software Vendor Program to Expand the Portfolio of Pega-Based Products 
Businesses are looking to accelerate their digital transformation initiatives to meet increasing customer expectations, which requires specialized technology solutions that fulfill unique business requirements. The Pega Independent Software Vendor program empowers partners to meet these needs as demand for Pega solutions continues to grow. This program will rapidly expand the portfolio of Pega-based products available to clients in existing and new markets.
Pega solutions power many of the world’s leading organizations across industries, including financial services, healthcare, insurance, telecommunications, manufacturing, and government. To ensure the highest quality solutions for these clients, the ISV program will welcome a select group of leading technology providers. Clients will be able to further extend and augment their existing Pega solutions from a certified library of new solutions, while qualified partners benefit from accessing new business opportunities.
Read More: Interview With Alexandre Debecker, Chief Growth Officer – Ubisend
At the time of this announcement, Rupen Shah, Vice President, ISV alliances & strategy, Pegasystems, said, “As Pega’s business continues to grow, our ecosystem must also expand to meet our clients’ increasing needs.”
Rupen added, “The ISV program is an essential part of this growth, which will give partners full access to the untapped potential within Pega Infinity. These solutions will enable our clients to become more competitive and accelerate time-to-market, all while leveraging and extending their Pega investments.”
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive
Pega Independent Software Vendor Program Will Be Led by Rupen Shah, Vice President of Independent Software Alliances and Strategy
Once accepted into the Pega Independent Software Vendor program, Pega will provide ISV partners with the ideal environment and tools to independently build, modify, and integrate with Pega’s industry-leading technology. All Pega-based solutions offered by ISV partners will be available on Pega’s online software marketplace, Pega Exchange. ISVs will work with Pega to develop content and market their solutions to increase visibility.
The program will be led by Rupen Shah, vice president of independent software alliances and strategy. In this newly created role, Rupen Shah will focus on building the ISV partner ecosystem across all Pega Infinity™ solutions and vertical markets to build on the company’s leadership and growth in the cloud and CRM markets. Pega Infinity™ includes Pega’s industry-leading application development platform and customer engagement applications.
Pegasystems Inc. is the leader in software for customer engagement and operational excellence. Pega’s adaptive, cloud-architected software – built on its unified Pega Platform™ – empowers people to rapidly deploy, and easily extend and change applications to meet strategic business needs.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
 


