Innovation Tri-Valley Illuminates Regional Distruptors As #GameChangers

23 Apr 2018

BioTech, Artificial Intelligence and Craft Beer Share the Stage.
With more than 450 tech companies alone in the Tri-Valley region today, Innovation Tri-Valley Leadership Group honored thirteen organizations with 2018 #GameChanger Awards as those who are creating a better world while living a better life today in the East Bay region.
Tri-Valley nominees for #GameChanger regional awards included Challenge Dairy Products, The Crayon Initiative, iQuest, SafeTraces, and Vintage 99. #GameChanger Awards were shared with Altamont Beer Works, BRIIA, Hexcel Corporation, Trov and Unchained Labs.
Dale Kaye
The Founders Award was bestowed on Sandia Laboratories for their leadership with the Open Campus, a tech transfer program now sharing research and data with organizations worldwide. The Social Innovator Award was awarded to Axis Community Health for their tenacious service and outreach to those in need in our region. The first ever Activator Award was shared with Tri-Valley Ventures, acknowledging keen vision in establishing the region’s first venture capital fund.
“Tri-Valley businesses are changing the landscape locally and around the world both through legacy companies with 100 years of product excellence, and early stage startups who are attracting high profile investors,” said Dale Kaye, CEO of Innovation Tri-Valley Leadership Group. “We are proud that the 2018 #GameChangers join a prestigous list of past winners including GE Digital, Bishop Ranch, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, NeoTract and Topcon.”
“The Tri-Valley is humming with investment and innovation,” said Rep. Eric Swalwell (CA-15). “It’s my honor to represent this vibrant business community, including my hometown of Dublin, and tout its accomplishments on Capitol Hill. The #GameChangers here are changing the game and brightening the future for the entire nation.”
The Tri-Valley region is an economic powerhouse complimented by wine country hospitality and open spaces. The Tri-Valley is comprised of the cities of Dublin, Livermore, Pleasanton, San Samon and the Town of Danville, and includes includes portions of Alameda County and Contra Costa County.


