Personalized Content Experiences Gains Massive Boost With Uberflip’s $32 Million Funding

25 Apr 2018

The Global Content Experience Platform Powers Lead Generation, Account-Based Marketing and Sales Enablement for Customers Including Schneider Electric, MongoDB, Stantec, and Pivotal Software
A Martech 150 RADAR company and a leader in delivering personalized content experiences, Uberflip, has announced the closing of a $32 million USD Series A funding round led by Updata Partners. The cloud-based content experience platform that empowers B2B marketers to create personalized content experiences at scale.
Why You Should Read The MarTech RADAR 2018: Top 150 B2B Technology Companies You Should Follow
The latest funding round demonstrates the continued momentum in the content marketing ecosystem. Uberflip has consistently achieved strong growth fueled by demand from businesses seeking to turn their large content marketing investments (forecasted at over $300 Billion by 2019) into leads and revenue.
B2B Buying Disconnect: Are You Targeting the Right Set of Customers?
To date, Uberflip has added more than 1,000 B2B companies to its customer roster, including Stantec, Schneider Electric, MongoDB, and Pivotal Software.
Yoav Schwartz
At the time of this significant funding announcement, Yoav Schwartz, Uberflip’s Co-Founder and CEO, said, “While 80 percent of consumers are more likely to do business with a brand that offers personalized experiences, less than 10 percent of marketers believe they are effective at personalization (Source).”
Yoav mentioned, “Uberflip’s new funding validates our vision and demonstrates excitement around the category of content experience which we’ve worked so hard to create.”
Yoav added, “This investment will be used to support ongoing product development aimed at enabling personalization, increasing engagement, and accelerating audiences along the buyer journey.”
These product innovations include the recent announcement of Uberflip AI and Site Engager that leverage artificial intelligence (AI) to deliver personalized content experiences on top of the Uberflip core marketing platform.  
Uberflip is uniquely positioned to capitalize on some of the biggest marketing trends today such as inbound marketing, ABM (account-based marketing), personalization, AI, and sales & marketing alignment. Innovative marketing and sales teams are using Uberflip to power personalized content experiences throughout the end-to-end customer journey.
– Stantec is using Uberflip to create engaging content experiences to accelerate lead generation.
– Snowflake Computing is using Uberflip to power their ABM strategy by creating scalable, tailored content experiences for target accounts.
– Pivotal Software’s sales team uses Uberflip to increase response rates by creating personalized content experiences to fuel meaningful conversations.
A New Era in Marketing: Content Experience 
While investments in content marketing continue to grow, research from SiriusDecisions finds 60-70 percent of all content produced by B2B marketing departments sits unused.
According to Schwartz, “Marketers have traditionally limited their definition of content marketing to creating content assets. Uberflip is in a unique position to help them turn standalone content assets into personalized content experiences in a way that builds engagement and revenue.”
Randy Frisch
Randy Frisch, Uberflip Co-Founder, President and CMO, said, “Marketing strategies like ABM, Personalization and Sales Enablement all hold incredible opportunity and promise, but as they gain prominence, marketing leaders are left struggling to adopt and integrate them in a cohesive way.”
Randy added, “These new go to market strategies create the perfect storm for Uberflip—helping marketers increase engagement and accelerate revenue by delivering personalized content experiences at scale.”
Jonathan Seeber, General Partner at Updata Partners, said, “We see eye to eye with Uberflip’s vision and are confident that the company is merely scratching the surface with the value it brings to marketers—particularly those in mid-sized and enterprise businesses. We are very impressed with Uberflip’s leadership and talent as well as the founders’ thoughtful and efficient growth strategy to date.”
Jon added, “We look forward to partnering with the company and are excited about what our capital and expertise can bring to Uberflip as they build on their leadership in the content experience category.”
Jonathan Seeber
As part of the transaction, Jon Seeber and Arun Singh will join Uberflip’s Board of directors, which also includes co-founders Yoav Schwartz and Randy Frisch.
Currently, Uberflip empowers B2B marketers to create personalized content experiences at scale. By providing marketers with the tools they need to boost engagement, generate leads, and fuel demand generation, they can better leverage content to meet their goals.


