Jive Communications Co-Founder Joins Board Of Directors Of VR Startup VSpatial

03 Jul 2018

Michael Sharp joins John Sallaway (CEO and co-founder), Richard Platt (President and co-founder) and David Tucker (co-founder) On The Board
vSpatial, the virtual reality meeting and productivity application, has added Mike Sharp, co-founder of Jive Communications, to its Board of Directors. As Chief Operations Officer and Chief Product Officer, Sharp helped guide Jive through startup to a successful acquisition by LogMeIn and is known as a brilliant and committed innovator in unified communications.
Sharp joins John Sallaway (CEO and co-founder), Richard Platt (President and co-founder) and David Tucker (co-founder) on the board. His experience adds to the already extensive unified communications experience that has vSpatial poised to usher in the future of work.
John Sallaway
CEO and co-founder, John Sallaway, said the following about the new addition to the board. “It is exciting to see talented and forward-thinking people like Mike Sharp join our board. It underscores the significance of what we are doing to play a significant role in creating the workplace of the future.”
vSpatial makes it possible for all participants to be in an immersive VR meeting and to easily share multiple applications with each other at the same time. This all happens simply and seamlessly in a virtual reality environment, with the voice conversation moving the meeting to the next level with intuitive controls and crystal clear spatial audio.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc
Key benefits and features of the app include: 
Team meetings in virtual reality
Immersive presence similar to real-life meetings
Eliminates commuting and footprint (green)
Eliminates the need for expensive physical office and conference room space
Delightfully use and share applications with infinite windows
Slack Integration (and more coming)
Eliminates complex setup of legacy solutions
Connect, collaborate, and create like never before
vSpatial is a Utah-based tech startup and our mission is to bring productivity and collaboration to the immersive world of VR. The application is currently available for free in the Oculus Store and support for additional platforms of the app is currently in development.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications


