Adobe Set To Acquire Magento Commerce For $1.68 Billion

22 May 2018

Adobe Surges Ahead in Content Management and Digital Experience Race Adding Magento Commerce Platform to Adobe Experience Cloud
Martech 150 RADAR company, Adobe has announced that it has entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Magento Commerce. Magento Commerce is a market-leading commerce platform. The acquisition is set for $1.68 billion, subject to customary purchase price adjustments. The addition of the Magento Commerce Cloud will enable commerce to be seamlessly integrated into the Adobe Experience Cloud, delivering a single platform that serves both B2B and B2C customers globally.
Also Read: Adobe Names David A Ricks To Its Board Of Directors
At the time of this announcement, Brad Rencher, Executive Vice President and General Manager, Digital Experience, Adobe, said, “Adobe is the only company with leadership in content creation, marketing, advertising, analytics and now commerce – enabling real-time experiences across the entire customer journey.”
Brad added, “Embedding commerce into the Adobe Experience Cloud with Magento enables Adobe to make every moment personal and every experience shoppable.”
The Magento Platform brings together digital commerce, order management, and predictive intelligence into a unified commerce platform enabling shopping experiences across a wide array of industries.
The addition of the Magento Commerce Cloud will enable commerce to be seamlessly integrated into the Adobe Experience Cloud, delivering a single platform that serves both B2B and B2C customers globally.
Adobe is the leader in designing and delivering digital experiences through content and data. At the core of every great experience are content and data, which enable the consistent, personal, intuitive experiences consumers have come to expect. Commerce is also integral to the customer experience. Consumers and businesses now expect every interaction to be shoppable – whether on the web, mobile, social, in-product or in-store.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive
Magento Brings Adobe Experience Cloud Digital Commerce Enablement
Magento brings Adobe Experience Cloud digital commerce enablement and order orchestration for both physical and digital goods across a range of industries, including consumer packaged goods, retail, wholesale, manufacturing and the public sector. The Magento Platform is built on proven, scalable technology supported by a vibrant community of more than 300,000 developers.
The Magento partner ecosystem provides thousands of pre-built extensions, including payment, shipping, tax, and logistics. This level of flexibility gives businesses the ability to quickly ramp and iterate their commerce capabilities for their unique business needs.
Current Magento customers include brands like Canon, Helly Hansen, Paul Smith and Rosetta Stone. Adobe and Magento share joint customers including Coca-Cola, Warner Music Group, Nestlé and Cathay Pacific.
“Adobe and Magento share a vision for the future of digital experiences that brings together Adobe’s strength in content and data with Magento’s open commerce innovation,” said Mark Lavelle, CEO, Magento.
Mark added, “We’re excited to join Adobe and believe this will be a great opportunity for our customers, partners and developer community.”
Upon close, Magento CEO Mark Lavelle will continue to lead the Magento team as part of Adobe’s Digital Experience business, reporting to executive vice president and general manager Brad Rencher.
Magento Commerce to Continue Operating as an Independent Until Q3 2018
The transaction, which is expected to close during the third quarter of Adobe’s 2018 fiscal year, is subject to regulatory approval and customary closing conditions. Until the transaction closes, each company will continue to operate independently.
Currently, Magento Commerce is a leading provider of cloud commerce innovation to merchants and brands across B2C and B2B industries. In addition to its flagship digital commerce platform, Magento Commerce boasts a strong portfolio of cloud-based omnichannel solutions that empower merchants to successfully integrate digital and physical shopping experiences.


