Are Your Customer Interactions Truly Authentic Or Just Artificial?

10 May 2018

Latest Executive Journal From TTEC Explores The Difference Between Artificial And Authentic Intelligence In CX
TTEC, a leading global customer experience technology and services provider focused exclusively on the design, implementation and delivery of transformative solutions for many of the world’s most iconic and disruptive brands, has released the spring edition of its executive journal focused on the “Authentic Intelligence” created by merging humanity with automation and machine learning.
When applying artificial intelligence in context of the customer experience, humans are the real key to innovation and evolution. People bring empathy, context, and ingenuity where AI, chatbots and machine learning provide analysis, efficiency and speed – this combination is what drives true innovation. Applying a strategic, customer-focused approach to the use of AI and automation in CX better enables interactions, empowers humans and increases engagement.
 Tony Tsai
“Digital transformation focused around the customer experience is not just about technology implementation but also about how humans carry forward the output of that technology,” said Tony Tsai, Chief Innovation and Information Officer, TTEC. “Brands which employ a thoughtful approach to automation and AI, including use of analytics and insights blended with the human touch at key moments of impact, will deliver on the promise of truly exceptional customer experience.”
This issue, “I am A.I.: The Emergence of Authentic Intelligence,” features perspectives on AI including:
AI Needs a Code of Ethics
Mind Versus Tech in the Digital Era
Taking the Bias out of AI
Each quarter, TTEC publishes its latest thinking in its executive journal, Customer Strategist. It features new ideas, best practices, and real-world examples of customer experience excellence in action.
TTEC is a leading global customer experience technology and services provider focused exclusively on the design, implementation and delivery of transformative solutions for many of the world’s most iconic and disruptive brands. The Company delivers outcome-based customer engagement solutions through TTEC Digital, its digital consultancy that designs and builds human-centric, tech-enabled, insight-driven customer experience solutions for clients and TTEC Engage, its delivery center of excellence, that operates customer acquisition, care, growth and digital trust and safety services. Founded in 1982, the Company’s 50,500 employees operate on six continents across the globe and live by a set of customer-focused values that guide relationships with clients, their customers, and each other.
Read More: How Did We Get Here? A Brief History Of The GDPR


