Blockchain And AI Venture Summit Announces Disruptive Innovation Award Winners

22 May 2018

OneTraction Continues To Disrupt The Startups And Corporate Innovation Experience With Its 6th Innovation Venture Summit hosted at Stanford Research Park
Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence Innovation Venture Summit: is an exclusive global conference enabling Fortune 500, Venture Capital, and Digital Transformation executives to meet and gather insights from tier one disruptive startups, serial entrepreneurs and thought leaders from the largest industries. The Focus will be on how to apply Blockchain, Artificial Intelligence and Robotics within key industries, enabling innovation that solve the most pressing challenges of our time. Here are the featured Startups and award winners of the venture summit, hosted at Stanford Research Park.
OneTraction, a Silicon Valley-based Incubator and On-Demand Venture Capital continues to disrupt the startups and corporate innovation experience with its 6th Innovation Venture Summit hosted at Stanford Research Park and Stanford Golf Course on May 18, 2018.
Read More: Poland Is World’s First To Put Banking Records On The Blockchain
The seven-track event was the first blockchain innovation conference in Silicon Valley that focused on key industries disruption and was attended by Fortune 500 Executives, Founders and Investors from the US, Asia, Europe and Latin America.
The Following Featured Startups at each track (Raised a Combined $200m +) are the winners of the Disruptive Innovation Award:
Artificial Intelligence: PocketConfidant is the first confidant available 24/7, facilitating conversations to develop awareness, reflection and learning opportunities. As a coaching innovation, PocketConfidant asks the right question at the right time, maintaining neutrality and objectivity by not offering advice or providing recommendations.
Individuals can have conversations on chat interfaces such as Facebook Messenger, Skype, Slack and web; voice interface soon. The coaching conversations are generated and trained by the PocketConfidant Team, and supervised by a board of experts in clinical-psychology, coaching, neuroscience and AI.
Blockchain: The team behind Captiv8.io, the world’s largest AI influencer marketing platform, is launching the world’s first blockchain protocol for content creation to disrupt the $300 billion dollar content industry.
Drones: Aerones – development of a high-performance multi-rotor aircraft with a payload capacity of up to 100 kg remote control and autonomous flight solutions and automated safety systems, electronics (sensor bus) solutions.
Biotech: Aromyx has built a solution for the digital capture of scent and taste – the EssenceChip™ – placing human olfactory and taste receptors onto a disposable biochip, with a digital readout. The Aromyx platform will be invaluable to large corporations in the food & beverage, consumer packaged goods, chemicals and agriculture industries, as it will enable digital manipulation of taste and scent, akin to how we work with images and sounds today.
Like visual recognition in the 1980’s and speech recognition in the 1990’s, olfactory and taste recognition technology is set to advance — and Aromyx has a proprietary breakthrough technology with many enterprise, defense, consumer and therapeutic applications.
Internet of Things (IoT): Within four years, the amount of data generated by tens of billions of industrial and commercial IoT devices will be massive enough to overwhelm the entire Internet. Our solution? Process, analyze and respond to IoT data right where it originates—at the edge of the network. At FogHorn, our “intelligent edge” software platform enables unprecedented levels of automation, operational efficiency, cost savings and much more.
Robotics: Anki wants to take Artificial Intelligence out of the lab and into your everyday life through consumer robotics products that are fun and friendly.
The company launched Cozmo Code Lab a while back so that fans could easily program the little robot. This allows both adults and children to learn to code Cozmo, whether they want to make him move, recognize faces, do animations, and lots more.
Mobility: Green Light Always is an international startup producing a hardware/software smart traffic signal solution utilizing artificial intelligence. They retrofit each intersection to be real-time adaptive to traffic conditions and communicate with surrounding intersections to create a smart network. This is achieved with video recognition, communications equipment, and artificial intelligence algorithms.
They are conducting a pilot installation in a South American capitol city on 6 live intersections. Following this they will expand to conduct multiple simultaneous demonstrations in additional cities.
Award Winners Featured Corporate Clients:
Amazon – Walmart – Microsoft – Uber – Toyota – Sony – Disney – Johnson & Johnson – Adobe – Macys – Nissan – Honda – Pepsi Cola
Award Winners Featured Investors:
Google Ventures – Andreessen Horowitz – Intel Capital – Index Ventures – Aramco – Bosh – GE – Dell – Honeywell – JPMorgan Chase – Y Combinator – StartX – TechStars
Read More: How Do You Close The Diversity Gap In Technology Companies?


