QuerySurge Adds BI Report Testing To Big Data Solution

15 Mar 2018

Testers can now Automate the Data Testing of their Business Intelligence & Analytics Reports
QuerySurge, the premier automated data testing solution for big data & data warehouses, recently launched its new BI Tester add-on to provide a successful approach to solving the problem of testing the data embedded in Business Intelligence reports.
The Challenge of Testing Business Intelligence Reports
The use of Business Intelligence (BI) & Analytics is growing rapidly. According to analyst firm Gartner, by the end of 2020, the market for BI & Analytics is forecast to grow to $22.8 billion. But a loss of confidence in the data in a report can squash a whole project. And the validation and testing of data in these systems is challenging.
“The typical approach is to validate calculations on the reports to the data in the data store,” said Matt Moss, a senior data testing expert on the QuerySurge team. “Many BI reports make use of Flash and other technologies that create problems for traditional test automation. So the testing process becomes a manual one, which increases the workload for testers and making it prone to mistakes. And most BI tools manipulate the source data, which makes it even harder to manually test.”
QuerySurge, the premier automated data testing solution for big data & data warehouses, recently launched its new BI Tester add-on to provide a successful approach to solving the problem of testing the data embedded in Business Intelligence reports.
The Challenge of Testing Business Intelligence Reports
The use of Business Intelligence (BI) & Analytics is growing rapidly. According to analyst firm Gartner, by the end of 2020, the market for BI & Analytics is forecast to grow to $22.8 billion. But a loss of confidence in the data in a report can squash a whole project. And the validation and testing of data in these systems is challenging.
“The typical approach is to validate calculations on the reports to the data in the data store,” said Matt Moss, a senior data testing expert on the QuerySurge team. “Many BI reports make use of Flash and other technologies that create problems for traditional test automation. So the testing process becomes a manual one, which increases the workload for testers and making it prone to mistakes. And most BI tools manipulate the source data, which makes it even harder to manually test.”
The Solution is QuerySurge’s BI Tester add-on
QuerySurge’s BI Tester add-on provides a successful approach to solving the problem of testing the data embedded in these BI tools.
BI Tester supports:
    Business validation of your reports
    Full regression testing of your BI data
    Migration testing from one BI vendor to another
    Upgrade testing from one version to another
    Comparison of reports between 2 servers
    Passing of parameters to a report
    Querying of report metadata
QuerySurge’s BI Tester add-on compliments QuerySurge’s fully automated end-to-end solution for testing from data sources through the Big Data lake to the Data Warehouse/Data Mart to the BI and Analytics reports.


