Datanomix Announces $1 Million In Seed Funding; Appoints John Joseph As CEO

25 Apr 2018

Data Analytics Company with New Hampshire Roots Relocates to Manchester
Datanomix, a company that provides a data analytics solution to mid-market manufacturing companies, today announced a $1 million seed funding round. A number of institutions backed the round including Mill Works Fund, 10X Ventures, Alumni Venture Group, Wasabi Ventures, the Worcester Polytechnic Institute Accelerator Fund, and several angels affiliated with Dyn and EqualLogic. In addition, the company announced John Joseph as CEO to launch and scale the company.
The funding will be used to fuel the next phase of product development and introduce the solution to the broader market. The Datanomix solution helps companies that are not necessarily skilled in advanced data analytics technologies tap into data sources in their production environments and connect them to both strategic and tactical decision making processes for their employees.
Greg McHale
“We are honored to welcome John as CEO and appreciate the support we have received from the New Hampshire tech ecosystem,” said Founder and CTO, Greg McHale. “Industrial manufacturing is undergoing a generational transformation with connected machines, sensors and robotics. There is a unique opportunity to bring these data feeds together in a way that is impactful to the C-suite and shop floor alike.”
“Datanomix is an exciting opportunity for me to reconnect with my mechanical engineering roots and leverage my background in enterprise data,” said Joseph. “100 percent of the companies we’ve met have a corporate initiative to make data analytics core to their operations, but are struggling with the complexity of these projects. Our solution simplifies the connectivity and data challenges that are impeding that initiative.”
With over 30 years of experience, Joseph is a proven leader and seasoned high-tech executive, having served as vice president of marketing and product management for New Hampshire success story EqualLogic (acquired by Dell in 2008 for $1.4B), and more recently led sales and marketing as president of DataGravity (acquired by HyTrust in 2017). He is a graduate of Worcester Polytechnic Institute and Clark University.
As part of its growth, Datanomix also relocated its corporate headquarters to downtown Manchester, NH, in a building recently purchased and renovated by local tech executive Kyle York, who is also an early Datanomix investor. York is general manager and vice president of business and product strategy at Oracle for the Dyn Global Business Unit (GBU).
“Datanomix is addressing an industry-wide problem with a solution that removes the pain and supplies the brain for Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) analytics projects,” said York. “We are thrilled to welcome them to the Manchester startup community.”
Datanomix provides a data analytics solution to mid-market manufacturing companies that want to deploy Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) technologies to improve production processes, but struggle with how to draw meaningful insight from these new data sources.
Read More: 10 Celebrities Who Are Investing In AI Startups


