Continental And NVIDIA Partner To Enable Production Of AI For Self-Driving Cars

06 Feb 2018

The Partnership Enables the Development of AI Computer Systems Scaling From Automated Level 2 Features To Full Level 5 Self-Driving Capabilities, Where the Vehicle Has No Steering Wheel or Pedals
Technology company Continental and NVIDIA announced today a partnership to create Artificial Intelligence (AI) self-driving vehicle systems based on the NVIDIA DRIVE platform, with a planned market introduction in 2021 for Level 3 features.
The partnership enables the development of AI computer systems scaling from automated Level 2 features to full Level 5 self-driving capabilities, where the vehicle has no steering wheel or pedals.
Dedicated engineering teams from each company will work together to develop self-driving solutions based on the NVIDIA DRIVE platform, which includes NVIDIA DRIVE Xavier – the world’s highest performance system-on-a-chip – as well as the NVIDIA DRIVE OS (operating system) and DRIVE AV (autonomous vehicle) software stacks. The solutions will utilize Continental’s experience in system and software engineering for ASIL D rated safety – the highest rating level – and integrate a range of Continental sensors technologies including radar, camera and high-resolution 3D LiDAR.
Dr. Elmar Degenhart
“The vehicle of the future will be a sensing, planning and acting computer on wheels. The complexity of autonomous driving requires nothing less than the full computational horsepower of an AI supercomputer,” said Continental CEO Dr. Elmar Degenhart. “Together with NVIDIA, we will deliver the complete AI self-driving solution from the cloud to the car. In doing so, we ensure the performance and flexibility required to achieve new levels of safety, comfort and personalized driving of future vehicles.”
Jensen Huang
“We now have all the key elements in place to take AI self-driving cars from development to mass production,” said Jensen Huang, founder and CEO of NVIDIA. “Our newly arrived DRIVE Xavier processor, extensive NVIDIA DRIVE software, and cloud-to-car approach for testing, validation and functional safety. Combined with Continental’s expertise and global reach, we will bring autonomous cars to the world.”
As the brain of the Continental system, NVIDIA DRIVE Xavier can deliver 30 TOPS (trillion operations per second) for deep learning, while consuming only 30 watts of energy. This unprecedented level of performance is necessary to handle the massive amount of data processing that self-driving vehicles must perform. These include running deep neural nets to sense surroundings, understanding the environment, localizing the vehicle on an HD map, predicting the behavior and position of other objects, as well as computing vehicle dynamics and a safe path forward.
Open NVIDIA DRIVE Platform Enables Collaboration
Continental and NVIDIA will initially develop highly automated driving features, including 360-degree perception and automatic lane changing on highways, plus the ability to merge in traffic. In addition, the system will integrate HD maps enabling the vehicle to localize themselves and provide mapping updates.
Continental’s expertise in advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) integrates multi-function cameras, fish-eye cameras with surround view, as well as short- and long-range radar sensors, high-resolution 3D LiDAR technologies, as well as central control units for assisted and automated driving. In 2016, Continental’s sales of advanced driver assistance systems exceeded €1.2 billion. The company expects ADAS sales to grow to €2.5 billion by 2020.
“Partnering with NVIDIA will enable Continental to advance beyond its leadership position in advanced driver assistance systems, delivering a scalable range of automated and autonomous vehicle systems, from today’s NCAP requirements up to Level 5,” said Luca De Ambroggi, research and analyst director at IHS Markit.
Continental develops pioneering technologies and services for sustainable and connected mobility of people and their goods. Founded in 1871, the technology company offers safe, efficient, intelligent and affordable solutions for vehicles, machines, traffic and transport. In 2017, Continental generated preliminary sales of around €44 billion and currently employs more than 233,000 people in 56 countries.
NVIDIA’s invention of the GPU in 1999 sparked the growth of the PC gaming market, redefined modern computer graphics and revolutionized parallel computing. More recently, GPU deep learning ignited modern AI — the next era of computing — with the GPU acting as the brain of computers, robots and self-driving cars that can perceive and understand the world.


