Noblis NSP Merges With Parent Company, Noblis

06 Apr 2018

Merger streamlines and strengthens Noblis’ cyber, intelligence, and advanced analytics domain expertise and capabilities
Noblis, a leading provider of science, technology, and strategy services, announces today that Noblis NSP, a formerly wholly owned subsidiary, has merged with the company.
Ellen McCarthy
The merger consolidates Noblis’ client delivery in the Intelligence and Law Enforcement markets under the strategic direction of Ellen McCarthy, former President of Noblis NSP. McCarthy will continue her leadership tenure at Noblis as Vice President of Intelligence & Analytics, overseeing programs that span over 14 federal agencies.
“Noblis is a true partner for agencies at all stages of a program – from lab to mission,” said Ellen McCarthy. “This merger gave us a great opportunity to realign our unique resources – our people, mission experience, and capabilities – in a way that best meets our clients’ missions.”
In 2014, Noblis acquired Noblis NSP to enhance the company’s science, technology, and strategy capabilities, namely in full-spectrum cyber and special intelligence programs.
“Since the acquisition of Noblis NSP, we have combined our expertise and applied it broadly across the Intelligence Community as a partner in combating our nation’s most aggressive national security threats,” said Amr ElSawy, Noblis President and CEO. “We understand the importance of remaining agile and adapting as our clients’ missions evolve and grow. Moving forward, this merger will streamline and strengthen the services, capabilities, and expertise we deliver to our national security clients.”
Noblis is a dynamic science, technology, and strategy organization dedicated to creating forward-thinking technical and advisory solutions in the public interest. We bring the best of scientific thought, management, and engineering expertise together in an environment of independence and objectivity to deliver enduring impact on federal missions. Noblis has consistently been named a top workplace, and was named one of the 2018 “World’s Most Ethical Companies” by the Ethisphere Institute.


