Replicon Leverages Artificial Intelligence To Usher In A New Era Of Enterprise Time Management

09 Feb 2018

New Facial Recognition and Chatbot Functionality Extends Replicon’s Comprehensive Time Intelligence™ Platform
Replicon, the Time Intelligence company, today announced the addition of facial recognition and chatbot to its platform. Replicon’s vision is to have all businesses treat time as a strategic asset to improve operational excellence, productivity, and profitability. Replicon is leveraging artificial intelligence and machine learning to make the time management process as unobtrusive and automated as possible. With facial recognition, chatbot, and intelligent business process management, employees will have to think even less about tracking time.
Facial recognition allows employees to simply walk up to their time clock and be automatically logged in through facial recognition. This process is not only fast and frictionless, but also eliminates buddy punching, and provides the benefits of biometrics without the additional hardware costs of new fingerprint readers. Additionally, users of Replicon’s mobile apps can be instantly authenticated using Touch ID® and Face ID®, as they have already become accustomed to on their phones.
With Replicon’s Intelligent Assistant, available on the mobile app, employees can interact about their time with a chatbot, just as they would with management or a colleague. This will make the process more of a conversation where employees now have an AI-powered personal assistant that works for them to help with time tracking and approvals.
Intelligent business process management enables teams to automate the approval process to their unique needs. This exception-based process validates data in real-time, so supervisors can get real-time visibility where it matters, without getting inundated with insignificant items extending the concept of unobtrusive time management to supervisors and managers. Businesses can now have the accurate data they need to make proactive, informed decisions.
Amy Barboza
“Time is one of our greatest assets as a company, and we’ve ensured that there’s no more guessing when it comes to reporting it,” said Amy Barboza, HR Director, Simmons Hanly Conroy, LLC. “The Replicon platform is always evolving and that helps us with visibility into how we’re spending time across the organization. Thanks to Replicon, time has become prioritized and simplified in our business, and we’re actually spending less time managing it.”
Raj Narayanaswamy
“We have always believed in staying ahead of the curve by utilizing cutting-edge technologies to create intelligent solutions,” said Raj Narayanaswamy, Co-Founder and Co-CEO of Replicon. “Our vision for long term Time Intelligence is to make enterprise time management as unobtrusive as possible, and these features are just the latest advances in helping businesses accomplish that.”


