New Online Service Aims To Expose Bitcoin’s Biggest Secrets

12 Jan 2018

Have You Ever Wanted To Become Your Own Bank? Bitcoin Has Grown Into A Global Economic Phenomenon And Bitcoin University Reveals How It Works For Millions Of People Around The World
Bitcoin became the hottest economic story of 2017, soaring as much as 2000% in value, and attracting millions of new users. In 2017 alone, it is estimated that over 1000 new millionaires have been created within the Bitcoin ecosystem. Will Bitcoin’s epic “bull run” continue into 2018 and beyond? Can you get started using Bitcoin? Should you get started? Bitcoin University fills in all the blanks on how new users should invest in, and use, what many people are calling “The Future of Money.”
If you haven’t heard of Bitcoin before, Bitcoin is an online digital currency that works very similarly to The Internet many of us use every day. It is decentralized, encrypted, and can send funds around the world in seconds, much like sending an email. Bitcoin has no CEO, central bank, or government controls, again, like The Internet. And it’s open-sourced design allows
developers from around the world to improve the protocol every day with state-of-the-art security measures, coding, and user applications.
Evander Smart
“What Bitcoin is doing hasn’t been seen since The Internet, itself,” says Evander Smart, Founder of Bitcoin University. “Bitcoin is creating investment value that traditional options simply can’t match and provides financial avenues that can help literally billions of people around the world who are currently ‘unbanked.’ With any Internet connection, Bitcoin literally makes you into your own bank!”
Smart has been involved with Bitcoin since 2013, after leaving his job as a banker on Wall Street. He has spent the last four years writing almost 1000 articles about the digital currency, while being paid in Bitcoin, and he trains people around the world in what he likes to call “The Future of Money.” Smart has now built an online platform, called Bitcoin University, to help anyone get started using Bitcoin, quickly and easily.
“Bitcoin is literally digital cash, and in the years to come, we will all be using digital cash instead of physical cash. Bitcoin University reveals how anyone can get started using Bitcoin quickly and easily, and exposes what it can and cannot do. Those who use digital currencies now can profit handsomely by getting ahead of this curve. You will be using digital currencies sooner or later, so why not make 2018 your year to enter “The Future of Money?” Bitcoin University makes it simple. If you can copy and paste, we can show you how to begin using Bitcoin today.”


