Loveland Innovations Is Ready To Help Roofers Close More Jobs With Drones

02 Feb 2018

Loveland Innovations to exhibit IMGING, the roofing industry’s first drone-based inspection and bidding tech at IRE
Loveland Innovations®, maker of advanced data analytics software and drone-based data gathering tools announced today that they’ll be demonstrating their solution, IMGING®, to roofers for the first time at the International Roofing Expo in New Orleans, Louisiana, Feb. 6 through 8. They’ll be exhibiting at booth number 565 in the exhibitor hall from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Feb. 6 and 7, and 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. on Feb 8.
Though Loveland Innovations began by focusing on improving the claims process for insurance companies, the technology they developed for automated drone-inspections and thorough, detailed roof reports put them in a unique position. As they worked with various restoration professionals specializing on the roofing side of the claims process, they learned that their technology had just as much value for roofers as it did for insurance professionals. Now, with components and features built specifically for them, roofers can take advantage of this ground-breaking technology to create more competitive, professional bids, while also increasing the speed of inspections, and closing more business.
Loveland Innovations adapted IMGING for the roofing industry to help roofers close more jobs. Using automated drones, roofers can inspect a roof in as little as five minutes, derive measurements inside the app, and view 3D models of the entire property for a quick overview. Best of all, they can produce professional roofing reports including ultra-high-resolution photos of damage, measurements, and other details, and share them with customers.
Jim Loveland
“We believe that a more professional, detailed roofing data capture system can be a key part to closing more business — it’s a much better experience for homeowners if you can offer more than just materials and numbers,” says Jim Loveland, CEO and Founder of Loveland Innovations. “When you can include measurements, inspection-grade models, and ultra-high-resolution images of the damage, it’s much easier to walk a customer through the real story of the roof and answer questions like: what’s damaged, and how was it damaged? Giving customers this kind of insight not only helps roofers develop immediate transparency and trust with them, but it also proves their expertise and commitment to providing the best, which is often the factor in winning more work.”
Outside of the benefit of reporting, IMGING keeps estimators safely on the ground, and improves the accuracy of their bids by providing highly-accurate measurements of every individual facet – even on steep or complex roofs.
“We know it can be annoying to call a third-party days in advance or pay for an expensive report just to get the measurements you need, and sometimes it can be downright dangerous to try and get that information yourself. With automated drones, estimators don’t have any risk of falling and they get the same detailed information they need, whether it’s a simple roof, or a more complex roof,” says Loveland.


