GRIMM Launches Michigan Cybersecurity Research Lab For Automobility And Aerospace Industries

05 Jun 2018

Grand Rapids-based Facility Will Encourage Regional Workforce Growth and Enhance Company’s Ability to Provide Embedded Systems Research and Engineering
GRIMM (SMFS, Inc.), a leading cybersecurity research and engineering firm, announced the opening of its new Grand Rapids, MI-based cybersecurity research lab. GRIMM’s new facility will enable the company to work more closely on cybersecurity initiatives within the advanced manufacturing, aerospace, automobility and defense industries based in the region.
GRIMM provides a wide range of security consulting, engineering and research services, including vulnerability research/testing and security training, to both government agencies and private sector enterprises. Through this new Michigan-based lab, the company will offer dedicated resources focused on engaging with companies specifically in the automobility and aerospace sectors, including Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), suppliers, and other stakeholders to improve the holistic security of automotive, aviation, and industrial control systems. GRIMM is also creating a classroom training space where its experts will teach hands-on advanced coursework for automotive and ICS security.
Read More: How Do You Close The Diversity Gap In Technology Companies?
Brian DeMuth
“Practically every new vehicle has connected or autonomous components and smart city technologies are being deployed into urban infrastructure on a regular basis. The realities of the Internet of Everything means that distributed systems, from industrial control systems to aerospace manufacturing operations and everything in between, must have security measures embedded or run the risk of exposing countless enterprises, systems and users to vulnerabilities,” said Brian DeMuth, GRIMM CEO. “GRIMM’s Michigan lab will enable our team of researchers and security experts to become more deeply embedded into the critical industries – automobility, aerospace, defense and manufacturing – that support these advanced technologies.”
GRIMM worked with The Right Place, Inc., a regional nonprofit economic development organization focused on helping companies identify possible sites and connect them with workforce development resources in West Michigan, and the Michigan Economic Development Corporation (MEDC) to secure funding and space for the facility, which will be located in the village of Sparta, MI. The opening of the facility is being supported by a $216,000 performance-based grant from the Michigan Business Development Program. GRIMM also plans to invest $621,000 over the next three years to grow its presence in the region while it creates 27 new high tech jobs in the same period.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Powerful Women In The Tech World
“West Michigan has emerged as a major tech destination. Our location provides proximity to a number of critical industries that call Michigan home – advanced manufacturing, aerospace, defense and mobility,” said Jennifer Wangler, Business Development Manager, The Right Place, Inc. “We are thrilled that GRIMM, a company dedicated to solving these immense cybersecurity challenges, has chosen to put its roots down in the greater Grand Rapids region – we have infrastructure, talent, a robust industrial base and a business-friendly climate that will help enable GRIMM’s success.”
GRIMM initially looked at opening its first Michigan-based facility for access to the state’s talented pool of technology workers as well as the region’s historic leadership in advanced manufacturing. GRIMM’s research lab will serve as a regional hub for its automobility and embedded systems research practices given its proximity to Detroit and the greater Michigan business community – home to a large number of automotive industry Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), suppliers, and other industry stakeholders as well as hundreds of aerospace-related companies.
GRIMM offers security engineering and consulting services backed by research and development in delivering the art of the possible in cybersecurity. The team services government and commercial clients from a diverse range of industries, including the safety sectors such as critical infrastructure, automotive, and IoT embedded devices, and web-based applications, networks, and systems. Additionally, GRIMM develops and teaches advanced custom courseware and training programs in software and embedded system security.
Read More: How Virtual Nurses Are Elevating Patient Care


