Atomic X Appoints Mike Gagnon As First Chief Financial Officer

31 May 2018

As the New CFO, Mike Gagnon Is Charged with the Planning, Implementation, Managing, and Running of All of Atomic X’s Financial Activities
Atomic X, an experiential artificial intelligence (AI) firm and consulting business, today announced the latest appointment to its leadership team. Mike Gagnon officially joins Atomic X as the company’s first Chief Financial Officer. Mike Gagnon is charged with the planning, implementation, managing, and running of all of Atomic X’s financial activities. He reports directly to CEO and Founder, Dan Cummins.
After emerging into the global AI marketplace with its flagship product, Rufus, and the addition of elite expertise that comes with Gagnon’s appointment, Atomic X is further accelerating its path towards future financings and laying the requisite foundation for growth.
“Our primary objective as a company is to help prepare both users and chat operators with a first-class, advanced chatbot,” said CEO Dan Cummins.
Dan added, “Mike has established himself as an incredibly successful financial leader, with a proven track record that will be pivotal in advancing the work we are doing with our proprietary chatbot solution, Rufus.
Mike Gagnon joins Atomic X with more than a decade of financial expertise within the technology field. As a seasoned professional, Gagnon has accumulated a tremendous amount of knowledge and insight into the inner-workings of early and late-stage venture capital financing. Prior to joining Atomic X, he served as Comptroller for Shopify, where he helped lead them through two private financing rounds for $15 Million and $100 Million respectively, as well as their successful IPO in 2015.
“Having worked in the fast-growing and dynamic hi-tech scene for a number of years, I’ve been incredibly impressed with the work that Dan and the rest of the team have been able to accomplish in such a short amount of time,” said Mike Gagnon.
Mike added, “I can’t begin to describe how excited I am to hit the ground running, on what’s been an already impressive trajectory for Atomic X.”
Currently, Atomic X provides experiential artificial intelligence (AI) firm and consulting business focused on next-generation chatbots. Comprised of strategists, designers, and builders, Atomic X is applying modern AI approaches to the world of customer communication and shaping the future of conversational user experiences. Their flagship product, Rufus™ is a fast-learning Chatbot that is revolutionizing the way products and services are sold online.


