Cognitive Intelligence Platform Hotify AI Expands Advisory Board

23 Jan 2018

Dr. Naresh Sharma of NASHERO and Silicon Valley Tech Leader, VR Satish Joins Hotify AI’s Advisory Board
Naresh Sharma
Dr. Naresh Sharma, a recognized leader in three fields namely, Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence, Aeronautics and Venture Funding, and VR. Satish, a recognized technology and business leader from Silicon Valley have joined the Advisory board of Hotify AI, a ‘Cognitive Intelligence Platform’ accelerating enablement of Enterprise AI Solutions.
Dr. Sharma is presently the founder and CEO of NASHERO, an aerospace company, producing exceptionally high-end aircraft made in Carbon Composites. Furthermore, NASHERO supplies precision machined made to order parts in aerospace alloys of Aluminium, Titanium and steel, to other aerospace companies.
Dr. Sharma, said, “I am very excited about Hotify AI’s approach to solving the Enterprise AI problem set in a horizontal way and I am keen to use the technology in my own operations soon.”
Satish is currently the Chief Technology Officer at Pavilion Data Systems which is pioneering a new class of storage directed towards a new age cognitive infrastructure. Prior to joining Pavilion Data, he was an Entrepreneur-in-Residence at Artiman Ventures and was an advisor to Nutanix. Satish was an early employee of VERITAS and later served as the Vice President and the Chief Technology Officer for the Information & Availability Group at Symantec Corporation prior to joining Artiman.
Satish said, “AI is going to change the way people operate their business, applications, processes, and infrastructure. Everything is at an inflection point. Hotify has a superb pedigree and base technology to help companies in different sectors navigate this inflection. I am super excited to be associated with them.”
Welcoming Dr. Sharma and Satish on board, Co-founder and COO, Hotify AI, K. Ramesh Kumar expressed, “I have worked with Dr. Naresh Sharma for a long time and we are very fortunate to have his sharp intellect and hands on involvement guiding our growth at Hotify AI.”
Ramesh added, “I have worked with Satish from early VERITAS days. Even though his core area of expertise is Technology, he has always focused on the Customer and Business Value to come out of the use of Technology and we are very fortunate that he has brought that Customer, and Business Oriented focus along with his Technical Brilliance to Hotify in helping us deliver value at scale and grow rapidly.”
Hotify is a ‘Cognitive Intelligence Platform’ accelerating enablement of Enterprise AI Solutions.
We bring AI platform & Solution capabilities and build AI enabled vertical solutions for Enterprises leveraging our partner eco-system to bring domain, and non-AI technology capabilities. Hotify is presently working with leading enterprises in Banking, Financial services, Manufacturing, Retail, Digital solutions, Customer Service Organizations, Technology and consumer packaged goods companies. Hotify’s ‘Cognitive Intelligence Platform’, provides an out-of-the-box ready-to-use AI backend, designed to accelerate development of intelligent systems and increase AI adoption. Hotify also offers AI advisory, consulting, solution architecture and other services that organizations may require as they work toward the adoption of AI.


