Virtual Reality Experience Provider Mk2 Launches Plug-and-Play Pods To Become First Worldwide VR Distribution Network

15 Mar 2018

mk2 On Track To Own Largest Network of VR Pods in the World, Global Rollout Brings Premier Content and White-Label Technology To Professional Market
mk2, the leading virtual reality experience provider in Europe, debuts the first VR plug-and-play solution for professionals: the mk2 VR Pod. The announcement comes one year after the opening of mk2 VR, the first and biggest VR space in Europe. With this large VR offering, mk2 will become the first VR distribution network worldwide with this end-to-end premium and white-labelled product line. mk2’s continued growth in the VR space signals the evolution of the European cinematic leader which has produced over 100 films, operates over 26 movie theaters spanning 200 screens and offers a library of more than 800 films from the world’s greatest directors, from Charles Chaplin to Xavier Dolan.
The mk2 VR Pod is the most adapted solution for cinemas, location-based entertainment, museums, institutions and more. mk2 VR offers twelve virtual reality pod offerings featuring three technologies (HTC Vive, Oculus Rift and PlayStation VR) and two full-body immersive simulators: the Holodia rowing machine and Birdly®. By including all the necessary technology within an aluminum-ballasted structure, the VR Pod can be installed anywhere within a few hours. The flexibility and scalability of the mk2 VR network puts the company on track to provide virtual reality experiences to the masses.
Elisha Karmitz
“Providing state-of-the-art technology to fill the void of white label solutions in the virtual reality space will be a catalyst for making VR a requisite part of consumers’ entertainment expectations,” says Elisha Karmitz, General Manager at mk2. “Adapting VR is a natural next step for the cinematic community and mk2 aims to be their trusted partner in delivering quality and memorable experiences.”
mk2’s premium catalog of curated VR experiences will be immediately available to customers with the latest offerings from the world’s leading studios updated monthly. Their partners include the following studios: Felix & Paul Studios, Atlas V, WITHIN, SuperHot Team and many more.


