Chronicled Adds To Its Advisory Board Former Google, Uber Exec As Well As Former Chairman Of The OECD’s Task Force On Countering Illicit Trade

20 Mar 2018

Chronicled, announced the addition of two new members to its Advisory Board.  AG Gangadhar and David Luna bring decades of experience in technology and government, respectively, to the Company’s leadership team.  Their input is expected to play a valuable role as Chronicled continues to scale its platform for trusted and automated supply chain solutions, which uses blockchain technology to safeguard assets from prescription drugs to precious metals.
Mr. Gangadhar, an early exec at Google Cloud and Uber, participated in an investment round in Chronicled through Thursday Ventures and will serve on the company’s Advisory Board.  He has a storied career in Silicon Valley, holding senior technical & business decision-making roles at a number of Fortune 100 companies. Mr. Gangadhar also sits on the board of directors at Madison Logic a global leader in Account Based Marketing.
David M. Luna
Mr. Luna is President and CEO of Luna Global Networks, an international consultancy firm providing strategic advisory services to address some of today’s global security and business challenges.  He previously served as President and Chairman of the OECD’s Task Force on Countering Illicit Trade.  A former U.S. Diplomat who has served in the White House and State Department, Mr. Luna is a frequent speaker on illicit trade and the global illegal economy (“dark side of globalization”), which fuel insecurity and instability around the world.  He has worked with governments and businesses globally to help address counterfeiting, illicit trade, product diversion, geopolitical risks, and market risks.
Notably, Mr. Luna made extensive contributions this month at the OECD’s meetings of the Task Force on Countering Illicit Trade, including promoting efforts to strengthen public-private partnerships and fostering cross-border collaboration and coordination to disrupt illicit markets and converging security threats. The OECD’s Report on Illicit Trade Markets outlines the top ten illegal trade markets globally.  In descending order of value, they are drugs ($200B), counterfeit electronics ($169B), marijuana ($141.8B), cigarette smuggling ($50B), counterfeit foods ($49B), counterfeit auto parts ($45B), oil theft ($37.23B), counterfeit toys ($34B), human trafficking ($32B), illegal logging ($30B), illegal fishing ($23.50B), and the illegal wildlife trade ($19B).  Chronicled’s blockchain-IoT platform offers groundbreaking solutions that can help combat all of these illicit trades, and Mr. Luna’s expertise is expected to play a major role in that effort.  The full OECD report can be found here: http://www.oecd.org/gov/risk/illicit-trade.htm.
Ryan Orr
“We are extremely pleased to welcome AG and David to Chronicled,” said CEO Ryan Orr.  “AG brings deep experience designing and deploying distributed network infrastructure, and he will be invaluable in assisting our team with optimization of blockchain data networks for performance, uptime, security, and resiliency.   David is well-connected in the international community to counter illicit trade and has relationships with many global associations and organizations that face exactly the kinds of problems Chronicled technology was designed to solve.”


