Nuance Voice Activation Technology Now Available For CEVA-TeakLite Family

27 Feb 2018

Fully Optimized Voice Activation Offers Exceptional Performance And Power Efficiency For Smartphones, Smart Home And IoT Devices
CEVA, Inc the leading licensor of signal processing platforms and artificial intelligence processors for smarter, connected devices, today announced the availability of the Nuance AI-powered wake-up and voice activation technology suite on the CEVA-TeakLite family of DSPs. Nuance’s voice activation can be easily integrated into any embedded system design, from always-listening smartphones and IoT devices to smart home personal assistants, allowing users to speak to these devices without pressing a button to activate the assistant. Tier-1 smartphone OEMs are already integrating this solution, which will be debuted in Spring 2018.
Kenneth Harper
“At Nuance, we’re at the leading edge of the conversational AI revolution, making it possible for people and machines to communicate naturally and seamlessly,” said Kenneth Harper, vice president of emerging solutions at Nuance. “When it comes to low-power embedded systems, the CEVA-TeakLite DSPs offer incredibly low standby power consumption for our market-leading voice activation technology, and also the processing power to run additional voice algorithms for further differentiation.”
Moshe Sheier
“The combination of our ultra-low-power audio/voice DSP and Nuance’s optimized voice activation technology makes for a highly efficient, always-on solution for the emerging voice-enabled market,” said Moshe Sheier, director of strategic marketing at CEVA. “The benefits of voice-enabled smart devices are undoubted, and Nuance voice activation technology combined with CEVA-TeakLite is ideal for power-sensitive battery-operated devices such as smartphones, headsets and the IoT.”
CEVA is the leading licensor of signal processing platforms and artificial intelligence processors for a smarter, connected world. We partner with semiconductor companies and OEMs worldwide to create power-efficient, intelligent and connected devices for a range of end markets, including mobile, consumer, automotive, industrial and IoT. Our ultra-low-power IPs for vision, audio, communications and connectivity include comprehensive DSP-based platforms for LTE/LTE-A/5G baseband processing in handsets, infrastructure and machine-to-machine devices, advanced imaging and computer vision for any camera-enabled device, audio/voice/speech and ultra-low power always-on/sensing applications for multiple IoT markets. For artificial intelligence, we offer a family of AI processors capable of handling the complete gamut of neural network workloads, on-device. For connectivity, we offer the industry’s most widely adopted IPs for Bluetooth (low energy and dual mode) and Wi-Fi (802.11 a/b/g/n/ac/ax up to 4×4).
Nuance Communications, Inc is a leading provider of voice and language solutions for businesses and consumers around the world. Its technologies, applications and services make the user experience more compelling by transforming the way people interact with devices and systems. Every day, millions of users and thousands of businesses experience Nuance’s proven applications.
Read More: Shakepay Launches Private Beta Of Cryptocurrency Mobile Wallet For Canadian Market


