Microsoft Will Offer Developers Of Consumer Apps More Money – 95% Revenue Share

09 May 2018

With A New Developer-friendly Fee Structure Coming Into Place Later This Year, Microsoft Aims To Create A World Where Developers Are Rewarded For Connecting Customers With Experiences They Love In A Secure, Reliable Way
MICROSOFT BUILD 2018: All You Need To Know  The biggest news in Seattle for the last two days has been the Microsoft Build 2018 conference.
In a blog, Microsoft Store Team expands on this announcement. “Microsoft Store is also the best destination on Windows 10 for developers to reach new audiences and gain new customers. We’ll focus on the infrastructure, so you can focus on building the best app and growing your business as a developer. To that end, we are excited about the announcement Joe Belfiore will be making at Build 2018 regarding a new Microsoft Store fee structure coming later this year,” says the post.
Consumer applications (not including games) sold in Microsoft Store will deliver to developers 95% of the revenue earned from the purchase of your application or any in-app products in your application when a customer uses a deep link to get to and purchase your application. When Microsoft delivers a customer through any other method, such as in a collection on Microsoft Store or any other owned Microsoft properties, and purchases your application, developers will receive 85% of the revenue earned from the purchase of their application or any in-app products in the application
The fee structure will be defined in detail in an upcoming revision to the App Developer Agreement later this year. Visit this page for current details and to sign up for a notification when the new fee structure goes into effect.
The new agreement corresponds with any consumer non-gaming app published to the Microsoft Store for PC, Windows Mixed Reality, Windows Phone or Surface Hub.
Microsoft will prompt developers to accept a new version of the App Developer Agreement that outlines the Microsoft Store fee structure in detail. The new fee structure will apply to purchases made after the date listed in the App Developer Agreement.
Other big news from the Microsoft Build!
The second screen
At the conference, they launched Your Phone: an app that brings your notifications, messages, and photos from the phone to your PC. The PC can be used to send messages (relayed through the phone), including the ability to drag and drop images into and out of the conversations. Notifications will be mapped, where possible, to corresponding PC applications or websites. The most recently used photos are also synced. This means you can also easily backup images and docs so you aren’t struggling with storage on your phone.
The seamless Edge
According to Microsoft, Sets will essentially allow you to have your entire workflow inside a single window. In the demo, once Microsoft Edge is open, you can start tabs for things like PowerPoint, Word, and Photos right in the same window. So, instead of having a ton of windows open at the same time, you’ll have a single window with a ton of tabs open. It’s up to you to decide whether this is actually better or not.
And another small but sweet feature has to do with the Alt-Tab shortcut to switch between websites you have open.
The history of your websearch
First are updated versions of the Launcher for Android and Edge for iOS that include support for Timeline, the big new feature of the Windows 10 April 2018 Update. Timeline gives a historic view of the documents, emails, and webpages that you have visited, making it easy and convenient to go back and resume working on your ongoing tasks. With the updated versions of the apps, the Timeline view is now accessible on your mobile devices.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World


