JASK Brings AI-powered Security Platform To Europe In Partnership With Ignition Technology

07 Mar 2018

JASK Answers for Channel Partners, a Programme Designed to Expand the Availability of the Autonomous Security Operations Platform, Launches in the UK Today
JASK, the provider of the industry’s only Autonomous Security Operations Center (ASOC) platform, today announced the launch of JASK Answers for Channel Partners in the UK and Europe. Ignition Technology, JASK’s first specialist Value Added Distributor (VAD) partner, will make JASK’s ASOC platform available to UK customers through its network of channel partners.
The JASK ASOC platform is an artificial intelligence (A.I.) and machine learning data solution for security personnel. The platform automates the collection, normalization, correlation and analysis of alerts, helping security operations center (SOC) analysts focus on the highest-priority threats to streamline investigations and deliver faster, real-time response. The platform is open and extensible, enabling customers to build on their current investments.
Marc Davis
JASK’s channel-driven global expansion comes on the heels of the introduction of the JASK Answers Partner Network, which brings together the industry’s leading cybersecurity solution providers and technology alliance partners. The program is led by industry veteran Marc Davis, JASK Vice President of Channels and Alliances.
“JASK enables security analysts everywhere to maximise their efficiency and focus their efforts on distilled data insights,” said Marc Davis. “With JASK Answers, we are committed to enabling our reseller partners in the UK to deliver the best possible products and services to their business customers.”
Sean Remnant
“Partnering with JASK allows us to meet the need for improved visibility and security analyst efficiency, while getting the training, marketing resources and selling incentives that empower us to become trusted advisors to our clients,” said Sean Remnant, CSO of Ignition.
Didi Dayton
In addition to serving as a strategic JASK distribution partner, Ignition is also a major Cylance distributor. JASK and Cylance recently announced a strategic partnership to integrate the CylancePROTECT AI-powered endpoint security with JASK ASOC platform for compelling device visibility.
“Both Ignition and JASK are important Cylance partners in their own respects,” said Didi Dayton, Vice President of Worldwide Channels and Alliances of Cylance. “The combination of JASK and Cylance delivers customers a single source for unparalleled visibility and protection across all data and assets, and our shared partnership with Ignition only extends the reach of this combined solution to the high-growth EMEA market.”


