Infosys Research: Digital Disruption Is Steering Enterprises From Core Modernization To Delivering Customer Delight

05 Mar 2018

Digital disruptions accelerate improvements in business processes, elevation in customer satisfaction, and increase in revenue and business growth
Infosys, a global leader in consulting, technology, and next-generation services, today released global research that provides insights into how and why organizations are adopting and investing in new digital technologies and strategies. The research report ‘How enterprises are steering through digital disruption‘, was compiled by interviewing 1,000 senior IT and business decision makers in organizations across seven countries.
Currently, enterprises are using digital technologies across a variety of areas in their core IT management (79 percent), business process management (60 percent) and customer relationship management (62 percent). This establishes digital-ready enterprises as those that are continuously investing in reinventing their businesses from the core including processes and systems, with as much enthusiasm as their customer touchpoints and journeys. The research also found that respondents’ organizations are looking to utilize digital technologies (if they haven’t already) across knowledge management (33 percent), operational intelligence (31 percent) and product development (28 percent).
Disruptive digital technologies continue to equip enterprises to consume and analyze data to improve business, both by reimagining processes and experiences. 67 percent of organizations that participated in the study are leveraging big data analytics. Over half of these organizations have already made investments in deep learning algorithms of AI.
The research also revealed that customer-centric technology investments are among the top three priorities for all industries except Manufacturing and CPG. Life Sciences leads the way (86 percent investing in technology for patient centricity during clinical trials), followed by Retail (79 percent investing in augmented reality for virtual stores) and Banking (75 percent investing in opti-channel for better customer experience). These technologies are also among the top priorities in Insurance (to encourage insurance buying behavior), Utilities (for omnichannel customer engagement), healthcare (to predict onset of health conditions) and Automotive (for connected cars).
Ravi Kumar S
Ravi Kumar S, President and Deputy Chief Operating Officer, Infosys, said, “The digital era presents enterprises with the unprecedented opportunity to reinvent their business from the core by continuously steering towards a more digital future guided by AI-powered insights to target the right opportunities to deeply automate, improve and even reimagine, both processes and experiences. A digital mindset enabled by rapid skill development and talent refactoring is vital to accelerate this transformation.”


