Partnership Between Leoni And PARC: Collaboration Supporting Digital Transformation

18 Jun 2018

Condition-Based Maintenance, Predictive Maintenance, System Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, And Embedded Sensing Will Contribute In The Area Of Energy And Data Solutions
Leoni, a global provider of energy and data management solutions in the automotive sector and other industries, and the research and development company PARC, a Xerox company, providing cutting-edge innovation for nearly 50 years, today announced a strategic partnership that will enable Leoni’s digitalization solutions. With the support of PARC’s groundbreaking technologies in the fields of condition-based maintenance (CBM), system analysis, artificial intelligence (AI) and embedded sensor technology, Leoni will drive its digital transformation forward. Initial research work is focused on the enablement of Leoni’s smart cable systems.
Technologies such as predictive maintenance and condition-based maintenance with the help of intelligent data analysis are now regarded as important drivers of Industry 4.0 and digital mobility projects. These technologies can help prevent unplanned system outages and increase availability of systems by evaluating all system components throughout their life-cycle and identifying individual components for replacement well ahead of performance degradation or failure. CBM or service/replacement of the identified components during planned maintenance windows reduces cost and system downtime. The initial focus of this partnership will be to customize and demonstrate PARC’s CBM and advanced system analytics for Leoni’s smart cable systems. PARC’s model-based approach delivers high predictive accuracy and negligible false alarm rates enabling Leoni solutions to support their customers with actionable data and design optimization, as well as the ability to smartly monitor and manage their systems.
Read More: Scale To Discuss How Self-Driving Cars Will Handle Unexpected Real-World Scenarios At The Information’s Autonomous Vehicles Summit
Torsten Schierholz
“PARC is a remarkable partner, who can lead us forward in our digital transformation,” said Torsten Schierholz, Chief Solutions Officer at Leoni. “Because of their interdisciplinary expertise and vast experience in condition-based maintenance, system analytics, embedded sensors, and AI, PARC provides us with innovative insights into key aspects of this digital change. Together, PARC and Leoni are working intensively together with Leoni’s customers and partners on a future, which allows us to incorporate new technologies in order to make energy and data transmission in cable systems even more intelligent, efficient and reliable.”
Read More: Jane.Ai Launches To Eliminate Wasted Time In The Workplace By Putting The Power Of Artificial Intelligence At The Fingertips Of All Employees
Ajay Raghavan
“As the internet of things (IoT) continues to develop and mature, every company needs to be thinking about how cutting-edge technologies will be deployed across software, hardware, and networking platforms,” said Ajay Raghavan, PARC Research Area Manager. “As part of the transformation, Leoni will lead its clients and partners in embedding intelligence throughout the ecosystem, from intelligent cables, cable systems and components for the automotive industry, energy, and infrastructure. We are excited about our partnership with Leoni which is leading to a deeper understanding of complex systems and effective CBM solutions.”


