ADLINK Showcasing Latest Machine Vision Solutions At AIA’s The Vision Show

27 Apr 2018

Application Ready Machine Vision Solutions for Robotic Guidance, Defect Inspection, Dimension Gauging and Identification Applications
ADLINK Technology, Inc., a global provider of advanced Edge Computing products will showcase the latest smart cameras, embedded vision systems and expandable computing platforms for graphic-intensive vision applications at AIA’s vision show, April 10-12, at the Hynes Convention Center in Boston, Massachusetts in Booth #528.
ADLINK will feature demonstrations of the company’s latest vision system platforms, including: 
NEON smart cameras that combine a PC, a frame grabber, an I/O extension board, and a camera in a single housing. The NEON smart camera is an open x86 based platform and supports many industry leading vision software applications.
EOS compact vision systems featuring Intel Core i7/i5/i3 processors, FPGA pre-processing, and four independent PoE ports
Matrix and MVP series industrial PCs with high-performance computing combined with PCI/PCIe high-speed expansion slots in compact enclosures.
Full line of PCI frame grabbers including, PoE GigE, HDMI, Camera Link, and CoaxPress.
Also on display in the ADLINK booth will be a live robotic vision demo with partner Recognition Robotics. The Robeye 3D vision guided robotic (VGR) solution demonstrates the NEON all-in-one smart camera integrated with an industrial robot arm for robot guidance.
ADLINK vision solutions will also be on display at the Robot Vision Technologies booth (#907). RVT will be showing off the latest version of its award winning collaborative Vision Factory (cVF) software platform, a highly advanced system allowing machines to more precisely operate in their environments.
Jacky Lin
“We are excited to see partners like Recognition Robotics and Robotic Vision Technologies leverage the value of an integrated solution like the NEON smart camera to develop unique 3D vision-guided robotic solutions,” said Jacky Lin, Senior Sales Director at ADLINK. “The combination of powerful software capabilities integrated with compact, rugged, all-in-one smart camera solutions enables new capabilities and increased value for industrial automation and robotic vision guidance applications.”
Read More: Bridging The Gap Between Physical And Digital Security Using AI


