Swift Navigation Recognized In Top 50 List Of Best CEOs For Women In Comparably’s 2018 Workplace Awards

18 Jun 2018

Of 30,000 Companies Evaluated, Swift Ranked In The Top 50 In Four Categories In The Small/Mid-Sized Company Bracket
Swift Navigation , a San Francisco-based tech firm building centimeter-accurate GPS technology to power a world of autonomous vehicles, today announced its inclusion in several business awards from Comparably, a compensation, culture and career monitoring website. Of 30,000 companies evaluated, Swift ranked in the top 50 in four categories in the small/mid-sized company bracket. The company was honored with the following awards:
#5 for Best CEOs for Diversity, as seen in USA Today
#22 in the category of Best Professional Development, highlighted in USA Today
#42 for Best Leadership Team, as featured in USA Today
#48 in the category of Best CEOs for Women, announced in USA Today
The honor of Best CEOs for Women is a standout accomplishment with this issue at the forefront of employer and media conversations today.
Jason Nazar
“2018 is the year in which women across the country stood up and spoke out against gender discrimination, pay inequality and harassment in the workplace,” said Jason Nazar, Comparably CEO. “Comparably’s Best CEOs for Women award recognizes the leaders that female employees ranked as the best of the best. These CEOs create cultures that support and encourage women, and we hope it will motivate other leaders to do the same.”
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?
Diana Schlosser
“I find Swift Navigation to be a professional, uplifting and encouraging environment for everyone, but especially for women,” said Diana Schlosser, Executive Vice President of Marketing at Swift. “The entire leadership team goes out of their way to ensure the voices of female engineers and team members at all levels are heard and supported.”
Swift was especially thrilled to be honored in the category of Professional Development.
“For all the effort companies place on hiring the right people, few of them put in the effort to help move people forward in their careers,” said Jason Nazar, Comparably CEO. “The intent behind recognizing the Best Companies for Professional Development is to highlight businesses that provide the most meaningful opportunities for career advancement. We should keep an eye on these companies for they are grooming the future leaders of tomorrow.”
Read More: Founder Of Tetris Henk Rogers To Serve As An Advisor For BLMP Network
Tim Harris
“It is core to our culture and values here at Swift that we nurture those with strong ambitions and help propel them toward their goals,” said Timothy Harris, Co-Founder and CEO of Swift Navigation. “It is in everyone’s best interest to challenge employees to reach new heights and help them maximize their professional potential.”
Comparably’s Leadership Awards are derived from sentiment ratings provided by employees who anonymously rated their employers on Comparably.com between May 23, 2017 and May 23, 2018. There were no fees or costs associated with participating, nor was nomination required. Large companies (organizations with more than 500 employees) had to have a minimum of 50 employees participating and small/mid-size companies (businesses with less than 500 employees) had to have a minimum of 15 employees participating to qualify. The answer to each survey question is given a numerical score and then compared to companies of similar size across the U.S. Additional weight is given to scores at companies with more participation from their employee base. The final data set is compiled from over 3 million ratings across 30,000 U.S. companies on Comparably.com.


