M*Modal Brings AI Powered Conversational Solutions To Healthcare

28 Jun 2018

M*Modal completes Lanier Voice acquisition, further expanding its global leadership to the Australian healthcare market
 M*Modal, a leading provider of clinical documentation and Speech Understanding™ solutions, today announced advancing its impact on Australian healthcare with the recent acquisition of Lanier Voice. Building on its mission of creating time to care for clinicians and helping healthcare networks deliver quality-driven care more cost effectively, M*Modal welcomes and supports Lanier Voice clients. With 40 years of experience in the Australian healthcare sector, Lanier Voice furthers M*Modal goals of delivering cutting-edge solutions that suit any environment and improve patient outcomes.
Follow Us
Advancing its long and respected history of delivering industry-leading medical transcription technology and services, M*Modal consistently aligns innovation to Australian market needs by enabling more intuitive and efficient clinician workflows. Driving incremental innovation, M*Modal provides healthcare organisations the stepping stones to a growth-enabling documentation strategy that leverages existing electronic health systems (EHRs), enhances current workflows, and provides the needed scale to meet future needs while reducing dependence on outsourced services. M*Modal also has a data centre locally hosted in Australia to put its solutions closer to the end user for greater consistency of experience, performance and compliance.
Read More: Mensia Technologies Raises 1.3 Million Euro To Introduce Koala Neurofeedback In Europe
Transcription to Real-Time Speech Recognition
M*Modal is one of the world’s largest medical transcription services organisations and its technology platform assists medical editors globally to productively turn dictation into text. In Australian implementations of M*Modal Fluency for Transcription™ with back-end speech recognition, internal transcription teams have seen productivity improvement of  up to 60% with a direct impact on the amount of work outsourced and turnaround times. Using the same cloud-hosted user speech profile, clinicians can also use real-time speech recognition to create, edit and sign work instantly, thereby eliminating the cost and delay of transcription.
Consistently ranked Best in KLAS, #1 Speech Recognition: Front-End EMR, M*Modal is the preferred choice for over 250,000 clinicians globally with the flexibility to document from any care setting, using any device and any workflow (real-time speech recognition, mobile documentation and/or transcription). Cloud-based M*Modal Fluency Direct™  is much more than speech-to-text technology as it is designed to contextually understand the clinician narrative for superior performance and is compatible with over 150 EHRs including Cerner®, EPAS from Allscripts®, Epic®, BOSSnet®, MEDITECH® and all leading EHRs.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
Computer-Assisted Physician Documentation (CAPD)
From accurately and completely capturing the patient narrative, M*Modal leverages its unique understanding capabilities to continuously analyse the note and provide clinical intelligence to the clinician at the point of care for real-time Clinical Documentation Improvement (CDI). AI-powered M*Modal CAPD identifies gaps in patient care, suggests improvements in quality, nudges the clinician towards best practices, and drives market-leading clinician engagement.
Read More: Think Next: Microsoft For Startups China Enables Chinese Innovations To “Go Global” And Overseas Innovations To “Go China”
Virtual Provider Assistant
Driving innovation to the next level, M*Modal continues to move along this conversational computing continuum with the development of a virtual assistant for a hands-free speech workflow to complete routine clinician tasks like EHR documentation, chart search, order entry, command management, etc. The goal of the virtual assistant is to reduce the documentation burden on clinicians, enhance the patient-clinician interaction, and drive higher-quality care.
Scott MacKenzie
“The Lanier Voice strategic acquisition complements our growth-driven portfolio of meaningful clinical documentation solutions and services, and we value Lanier Voice’s history as a very successful company,” said Scott MacKenzie, CEO of M*Modal. “We look forward to continuing to lead the industry through innovation and partnerships that bring more value to our combined clients and their patients.”
“We are delighted and proud to be a part of the M*Modal family and to provide Australian hospitals and health networks with a smarter, more cost-effective alternative,” said Duncan Burnett, CEO of Lanier Voice. “Together, we are well poised to become the clear Australian leader in clinical documentation solutions. This is a very positive development for Lanier Voice clients and employees.”
Read More: Deloitte Government Human Capital Trends Reveal Need For Greater C-Suite Collaboration


