Vertebrae Delivers Augmented Reality At Scale For ‘Power Rangers’ 25th Anniversary Campaign

06 Mar 2018

Saban’s Power Rangers Ad Campaign Marks First Multi-Environment Augmented Reality Experience on Mobile Web
With Saban Brands, Vertebrae, the leading augmented and virtual reality platform, has unveiled the first multi-environment mobile Web Augmented Reality (AR) ad experience as part of the official twenty-fifth-anniversary campaign for Saban’s Power Rangers, the iconic superhero franchise.
Power Rangers
Currently, Vertebrae is the leading augmented and virtual reality advertising platform enabling marketers to captivate and engage audiences with immersive media at scale. Major brands and agencies work with the Vertebrae platform to create and deploy AR & VR ads across the largest immersive audiences available.
Janet Hsu, CEO, Saban Brands
At the time of this announcement,  Janet Hsu, CEO, Saban Brands, said, “With Vertebrae, we are able to widely distribute this multi-faceted experience built specifically for the fans to bring Saban’s Power Rangers to life through an innovative mobile AR campaign.”
Janet added, “Since the ‘Power Rangers’ premiere in 1993, fans have imagined themselves as Rangers and with this immersive experience, fans can put themselves in the Rangers’ helmets to unleash their inner superhero, right on their mobile devices.”
Vince Cacace, CEO, Vertebrae, said, “This is the most sophisticated Web augmented reality ad campaign to date, and people can experience it at scale.”
Vince added, “Historically AR has not been accessible at scale but Vertebrae’s AR ad units work on premium publisher sites across the mobile Web, bringing Saban’s Power Rangers’ AR experience to hundreds of millions of people across the US.”
Launched on premium publisher sites across Safari and Chrome mobile browsers on March 5, 2018, this first-of-its-kind interactive AR experience allows fans to morph into their favorite Power Ranger and teleport to the Command Center. The mobile Web AR experience is part of Saban Brands’ “You’ve Got the Power” campaign leading up to the Power Rangers’ official 25th anniversary on August 28, 2018.
From its inception, Vertebrae was built to support virtual and augmented reality advertising for the next generation of immersive media. Vertebrae’s Web AR offering leverages proprietary FACE® and SPACE® augmented reality technologies.
FACE® uses front-facing camera and proprietary computer vision technology (face mapping, gesture recognition, and green screen), and allows people to virtually try-on objects and simulate animated experiences.
SPACE® uses a rear-facing camera and computer vision technology (markerless point and surface tracking) and allows people to place objects in their physical environments like placing a car in a driveway or a coffee maker in a kitchen.
Cacace added, “Web AR marketing needs to have utility and provide an engaging and personalized experience for a consumer on the path to purchase. We’re excited to help Saban Brands develop an interactive relationship with its global audience, by allowing Power Rangers fans to take part in and be the star of the experience.”
Currently, Power Rangers is celebrating 25 continuous years on the air, making it one of the longest-running kids’ live-action series in television history with nearly 900 episodes aired to date. Created by Haim Saban and launched in 1993 with Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, the franchise celebrates its milestone anniversary year with the 25th season, “Power Rangers Super Ninja Steel” currently airing on Saturdays at 12 p.m. (ET/PT) on Nickelodeon in the US.
Following its introduction, “Power Rangers” quickly became the most-watched television program in the United States and remains one of the top-rated and longest-running kids’ live-action series in television history. The series, currently in its 25th season, follows the adventures of a group of ordinary teens who morph into superheroes and save the world from evil. It is seen in more than 150 markets, translated into numerous languages and a favorite on many key international children’s programming blocks around the world.


