Tencent Video Achieved 62.59 Million Paid Subscriptions, Maintaining No.1 Position In China Online Video Industry

19 Mar 2018

Comprehensive and premium content matrix caters to diversified viewers’ demand whilst self-commissioned programs drive its paid subscription growth
Tencent Video today announced its paid subscriptions reached 62.59 million as of the end of February 2018, which further enhanced its leading position as the largest online video platform in China. This demonstrated the platform’s rapid growth following its announcement of 43 million paid subscriptions by the end of September 2017, which made it the No.1 online video platform in China. At the same time, Tencent Video achieved average mobile daily active users (DAU) of 137 million on mobile devices in the fourth quarter of 2017. As measured by these two core dimensions, Tencent Video attains the leading position in the online video industry in China.
Apart from these, Tencent Video is also leading the industry according to professional third parties’ analysis on the comprehensive competitiveness of online video platforms.
According to iResearch, the leading provider of online audience measurement and consumer insights in China, its mVideoTracker data showed that Tencent covered 790 million units of video streaming devices in January 2018, nearly 100 million units more than the second player.
According to App Annie, Tencent Video ranked the 6th in China’s iOS top grossing chart in 2017. It ranked the 3rd in the fourth quarter of 2017, following two games apps (Honor of Kings and Fantasy Westward Journey) and was the No.1 in the video category.
In terms of content, according to Vlinkage, a professional video and new media data monitoring company in China, Tencent Video achieved the lead in the industry, covering 80% of the top 20 most popular TV drama series in China.
In terms of brand recognition, according to the 2017 Video Industry Competitiveness Tracking Survey done by Gisi, a third party market research organization, Tencent Video ranked top with 44% of top of mind brand, far surpassing the second brand by 17 percentage points, which reflected the significant success of Tencent Video in brand recognition.
All the above indicators demonstrate that Tencent has established its leadership in the online video market.
Tencent Video achieved this outstanding performance through its committed investment and innovation in content, operation and marketing. It has built up a comprehensive and premium content library consisting of TV drama series, movies, variety shows, documentaries, children’s programs, animation music and more.
The popular TV drama series, especially the self-commissioned content, have delivered outstanding performance, such as The Nothing Gold Can Stay (那年花开月正圆), the Candle in the Tomb (鬼吹灯) series, Country Love Story (乡村爱情) series, The Eternal Love (双世宠妃), A Love So Beautiful(致我们单纯的小美好), have further strengthened subscribers’ stickiness and have driven rapid growth in subscription.  Other successful programs, such as The Coming One (明日之子), a self-commissioned variety show), animation series including The Glory (全职高手) and Fights Break Sphere (斗破苍穹), and The Blue Planet II (a BBC documentary), have also contributed to the rapid growth in subscription , enriching the viewing experience of Tencent’s subscribers.
“At Tencent, we always endeavor to offer superior user experience and member services,” said Thirty Sun, Vice President of Tencent and CEO of Tencent Penguin Pictures, “Tencent is the first video platform which supports Dolby vision in China and we have developed various privileges for subscribers including quick time play, reserved cache, blue-ray display and interactive bullet screen. We are dedicated in providing users not only privileges on content and entertainment, but also lively and enjoyable viewing experience.”


