UVify’s Newest Drone, The OOri FPV Micro Racer Wins Multiple Awards At CES 2018; Pre-orders Now Open

02 Mar 2018

Pre-orders are now open for the world’s fastest production micro racing drone, the UVify OOri, winner of Digital Trends Top Tech of CES 2018 award and Best Mini Drone / Best Beginner’s Drone award from Drone Rush for CES 2018.
Sharing the DNA of the award-winning racing drones Draco and Draco HD, OOri is also best-in-class in every area that matters–speed, agility, endurance, technology, and design.
OOri includes everything you need to fly right out of the box. OOri comes bundled with a controller that features a built-in color LCD screen for First-Person View (FPV) piloting, giving you the experience of flying with a bird’s eye view of the world.
OORI’S KEY FEATURES:
Customizable Colors opens up unlimited personalization options with the push of a button. Easily identify teammates and competitors when racing thanks to its tweakable LEDs.
Performance-tweaked Brushless UVify Motors coupled with UVify sensor technology means OOri has more power than any other micro drone. OOri’s single LiPo battery and brushless motor combination is a first for a micro racing drone.
Lock-on, Pop-off Prop Protector is designed to make it a snap to attach the prop guard to OOri when learning new moves. Taking it off is just as easy when the time comes for greater power and agility.
Quick-Click Battery features a plug and wire-free design, which means inserting and swapping out batteries is a smooth experience. OOri’s battery is equipped with voltage-protection technology, giving you the freedom to focus on racing in the crucial final seconds.
Holds Position automatically, a first for a racing drone. Flatten the learning curve and fly carefree. OOri’s ground-proximity sensor lets you focus on developing your flying skills, instead of the ground.
OOri is available for a special preorder price of $289 now at UVify.com. Following the pre-order sale, OOri will retail for $389.


