Fire Lotto Announces The First Transparent Decentralized Blockchain Lottery

20 Feb 2018

Blockchain Technology Assists In Solving The Problem Of Single Server Online Betting
FireLotto, the world’s first decentralised lottery built on the Ethereum blockchain brings changes and transparency to the industry.
Fire Lotto launched on the 1st of January and has revolutionised the lottery gaming by utilizing blockchain technology, in particular, the Ethereum blockchain. As this blockchain is decentralised it allows Fire Lotto to be completely transparent. Until recently the thought of a decentralised lottery was impossible; now it has become a reality. Blockchain technology assists in solving the problem of single server online betting.
Fire Lotto is as simple to play as any traditional lottery, either on, or offline. However, there has been a question of trust raised by a number of companies. By utilising the Ethereum protocol and smart contracts, it is impossible to alter the ticket information thereby, bringing complete transparency to the industry. The Fire Lotto team ensure this to be the case, by allowing all players and potential users to view the backend code, to prove beyond doubt that the system is fair.
FireLotto, much like any other lottery, works in a very straightforward manner, with the prize fund created via the completed ticket sales. Players then guess the number sequence and wait for the draw. Players can play one of three lottery games at FireLotto: – the 6/45, 5/36 and the 4/20. The fun doesn’t stop there; they also offer an instant lottery much like a wheel of fortune. The wheel has 21 numbers. The player simply chooses a number and places a bet, the minimum being 0.007ETH with a multiplier of 2 to 20. If the player has chosen the correct number/s, the return would be increased proportionally, allowing the chance to win big. The token holder receives a commission from each ticket sold in every drawing. Commission payouts are secured by smart contracts and provide token holders with an almost endless source of income.
The 6/45 lottery has a minimum jackpot of 3000ETH which is the equivalent of 1,000,000 USD. As with the traditional lottery system, if nobody wins then the prize money it is rolled over, and the next lottery jackpot increased continuously until a player wins. Fire Lotto Lottery has already launched in Ethereum test net. You can try and test it. It is as simple and easy to understand as a traditional lottery.
The Firelotto team had this to say: “80% of ICOs are not backed up by any product prototype. Fire Lotto is a finished product that has already been launched.”
Fire Lotto Token Sale
The private pre-sale of tokens ended on the 15th of January 2018. 77 million FLOT tokens will be sold during the event to aid in the development of the platform. The presale runs from the 15th of January 2018 until the 15th of February 2018. The main sale of FLOT tokens will run from the 15th of March 2018 until the 15th of April 2018. 100 million tokens are to be released in total.
Read More: Interview With Tomer Kashi, Co-Founder & CEO, SkyWatch


