Blueshift Adds Chandar Pattabhiram To Its Board Of Directors To Accelerate AI-Powered Marketing

21 Aug 2017

Former Marketo CMO to join Blueshift’s board, joining former Marketo board director Tae Hea Nahm among others
Blueshift, the leader in Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Powered Marketing across all channels, today announced that digital marketing executive and veteran software industry marketer Chandar Pattabhiram is joining its Board of Directors.
Chandar Pattabhiram currently serves as the chief marketing officer (CMO) at Coupa Software, a leader in cloud-based spend management. Prior to joining Coupa, Pattabhiram was CMO at Marketo where he oversaw the positioning of Marketo as the digital marketing industry’s innovation leader. Previously, Pattabhiram was head of worldwide marketing for Badgeville and vice president of product and channel marketing at IBM Cast Iron Systems. Pattabhiram also spent years at Andersen Consulting (now Accenture) as an advisor to Fortune 500 companies. In 2017, LinkedIn named Pattabhiram as one of the top 5 CMOs to follow for thought leadership in digital marketing.
Read More: CarePredict Unveiling AI-Powered Elder Care Technology Platform
“The time is now for AI technologies in marketing to move from the backseat into the driver’s seat,” said Pattabhiram. “Ever since my first meeting with the Blueshift team, I’ve been beyond impressed by their offering and how easy it makes it for marketers to utilize AI to orchestrate entire customer journeys and harmonize their customer interaction data. Blueshift’s platform leapfrogs the capabilities provided by legacy cross-channel consumer marketing tools.”
Pattabhiram, who is the first independent board member at Blueshift, joins a former Marketo director, Tae Hea Nahm, on the Blueshift board. Welcoming him, Nahm said “Chandar is one of the most well respected marketing minds who helped shape the marketing automation industry. With the rapid emergence of AI as the next frontier in digital marketing, I look forward to working with Chandar and the Blueshift team to help accelerate their vision of AI-powered marketing.” Other board members include Blueshift’s founders, and Jishnu Bhattacharjee, Managing Director at Nexus Venture Partners.
Read More: How Citizen Health Is Redesigning Healthcare With An Open & Transparent Marketplace
“Chandar is one of the foremost leaders in the world of marketing and a natural fit for our board,” said Vijay Chittoor, CEO of Blueshift. “He will be a great partner as we empower marketing teams across the world to connect with their customers on a one-to-one basis across all channels using the power of AI.”
Blueshift’s recent innovations in AI-Powered Marketing include “AI-Powered Customer Journeys,” a next generation solution that enables marketers to deliver content rich & personalized customer engagement across every marketing channel. Blueshift is hosting a webinar this month on the theme of “AI in the Inbox” with partner Sparkpost and customer LendingTree.


