Victory Square Technologies Invests In Top Three Companies At World Blockchain Forum: Investments & ICOs Conference In Dubai, United Arab Emirates

02 May 2018

Victory Square Technologies, returns from the World Blockchain Forum: Investments & ICOs Conference in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, with newly-formed partnerships and investments in three promising blockchain companies that won awards for their presentations in Dubai.
The longest-running and highest-attended financial conference for the bitcoin, blockchain and cryptocurrency industries in the Middle East saw over 1,000 attendees converge in Dubai for the two-day event that took place April 16 and 17, 2018. It saw Victory Square partner with Keynote, the World Blockchain Forum to present the top 3 ICOs Award at the event. The three emerged from the 30 companies that were vetted and selected by the World Blockchain Forum to present their ICOs (with those 30 drawn from an initial pool of applicants).
Victory Square management viewed the presentations of the 30 ICO attendees and conducted Q&A sessions with the management teams of the shortlisted companies. Through this vetting process, Victory Square identified three companies as the top 3 ICOs – companies with which they will explore further relationships. Each of the identified companies will receive $33,000 towards the private sale of their respective tokens. In exchange, Victory Square will receive discounted tokens in the companies’ private pre-sale.
The top 3 companies selected by Victory Square management to share in the $100,000 investment prize pool were: SBC Platform, CryptoCurve, and Paytomat.
Peter Smyrniotis, a member of the Board of Directors of Victory Square, also presented at the conference, outlining Victory Square’s involvement in the blockchain industry and its track record of incubating some of the most promising and disruptive companies.
Peter Smyrniotis
“This year’s World Blockchain Forum in Dubai featured yet again an impressive collection of the most forward-thinking minds in the blockchain industry,” said Smyrniotis. “We are very proud to be partnered with some of the brightest visionaries on the forefront of this technological revolution. Victory Square’s continued growth and success have been well met by our peers, and we have received strong validation and support for the global brand that we are building. The ability to share our vision and collaborate with other like minds provides the backbone of the structure that will support the technological world in the years to come.”


