Twistlock Launches Twistlock Advantage Program

11 Jun 2018

First of its kind partner program for cloud native security equips partners with technical, sales and marketing support
Twistlock, the leading provider of container and cloud native cybersecurity solutions, today announced the Twistlock Advantage Program (TAP), a comprehensive partner program for technology, consulting and reseller partners across the cloud native ecosystem.
Read More: Kraken Joins NVIDIA Inception Program
Vendors from the DevOps, cloud and security industries are joining the Twistlock Advantage Program to provide a modern set of tools and practices for customers running cloud native applications and adopting DevSecOps practices.  Members will deliver technology and consulting services to speed customer adoption and success with cloud native technology.
John Leon
“Our customers aren’t just modernizing their security – they’re reinventing the way they build, ship and run applications.  By uniting in the Twistlock Advantage Program, Twistlock and our partners are able to collectively provide a better customer experience at every stage of the application lifecycle with innovative technology and consulting solutions,” said John Leon, Vice President, Business Development and Strategic Alliances, Twistlock.
Read More: Microdrones Participates In NVIDIA Jetson Developer Meetup At Embedded World 2018
Program benefits include training materials and courses, access to APIs and technical documentation to enable co-development and integration, as well as go to market resources and joint promotion opportunities.  By enrolling in the Twistlock Advantage Program, partners can increase their value to customers by helping to provide security at every stage of the DevSecOps workflow.
The Twistlock Advantage Program debuts at this week’s DockerCon conference in San Francisco, CA.  Charter members include: Amazon Web Services (AWS) (Twistlock is an AWS Partner Network (APN) Partner), Cloudability, CodeFresh, CyberArk, Cylance, Datadog, Diamanti, JFrog, Pivotal, Rancher, Red Hat, Red Lock, Sumo Logic and SUSE.
Read More: Strategic Value? Why Everyone Is Talking About Microsoft Acquiring GitHub


