Precision Health AI And Vector Oncology Partner To Deliver Real World Evidence Oncology Solutions

31 May 2018

Pharma, Providers and Payers Can Now Leverage Combined Definitive Real World Oncology Data, AI Platform and Leading HEOR Analytics Capabilities
Precision Health AI, a leader in RWD and AI solutions for precision health in Oncology, and Vector Oncology, a leader in real-world oncology research and Health Outcomes solutions, announced a partnership to deliver best in class Real World Evidence (RWE) based oncology solutions. The PH.AI license with ASCO/CancerlinQ, now paired with Vector Oncology’s world-class curation and HEOR team, delivers the definitive deep clinical oncology data set — to the benefit of the entire industry.
Brigham Hyde
“Vector Oncology brings comprehensive existing data assets – including proprietary PRO quality of life and symptom burden data – and a large scale world-class team of oncology nurse abstractors with a track record of delivering research quality outcomes end-points from the curation of real-world data” said Brigham Hyde, PhD, Chief Executive Officer of Precision Health AI. “This partnership truly sets the PH.AI EurekaHealth Oncology Platform apart by delivering on the promise of precision medicine and providing unprecedented actionable intelligence to Life Science customers.”
Vector Oncology provides research and RWE services to leading pharmaceutical companies, including the design and execution of retrospective and multi-year hybrid studies enrolling targeted cohorts of patients in active treatment to deliver real-time, real-world evidence on current and changing treatment combinations, comparative effectiveness, health outcomes, and economic value. Vector Oncology HEOR studies replicate the accuracy and endpoints of prospective research designs and contribute to peer-reviewed publications and regulatory submissions, including synthetic control arms and pragmatic randomized clinical trials. Vector Oncology was acquired in December 2017 by SymphonyAI.
Michael Choukas
“Collaboration with PH.AI has transformed our ability to offer large scale, real-time, real-world data, AI-driven actionable intelligence, and enable outcomes research solutions contributing to better cancer patient care, getting the right treatment to the right patient at the right time,” said Michael Choukas, CEO of Vector Oncology. “This partnership means we’ll get our clients and oncology patients to better outcomes faster and more efficiently.”
The partnership announced today creates an unmatched level of depth, breadth, and accuracy powering new real-world health outcomes research and data solutions that will demonstrate the efficacy, effectiveness, safety, and value of oncology therapeutics to meet evolving regulatory standards.
“The PH.AI/Vector Oncology Definitive Real World Data assets and combined capabilities, supported by PH.AI’s world-class team of AI and data scientists, are accelerating and streamlining our life science clients’ oncology discovery and clinical development programs, and delivering unmatched real-world evidence and intelligence in support of their regulatory submissions, publications and clinical objectives,” said Dr. Romesh Wadhwani, Chairman and CEO of SymphonyAI.
Read More: GameFace Labs Opens Pre-Orders For Android-Based VR Headset Powered By NVIDIA Jetson TX2
Precision Health AI is developing the leading artificial intelligence (AI) platform for oncology built on the largest longitudinal clinical oncology dataset to enable the practice of precision medicine for better cancer patient care, getting the right treatment to the right patient at the right time. Insights from Precision Health AI will accelerate cancer-related drug development, trials and real-world evidence for the benefit of the cancer care ecosystem of oncologists, pharmaceutical companies, payers and patients.
Vector Oncology is a leader in the design and delivery of care based oncology research and data analytics. Utilizing our Definitive Oncology Real World Data assets and proprietary Patient Care Monitor (PCM) patient engagement and outcomes platform, our experienced project teams, medical experts and health economics and outcomes scientists design and deliver high-quality studies generating real-world evidence and insight contributing to publications and regulatory submissions.
SymphonyAI is a group of companies that provide the leading AI-centric solutions for transforming the business enterprise by driving revenue growth and operational excellence, for the retail, CPG, healthcare and industrial verticals, and for finance, IT and other key enterprise horizontal functions. Founded by Dr. Romesh Wadhwani, SymphonyAI is one of the fastest growing companies in the business-to-business AI solutions sector with revenue this year of $275 million and 1,500 employees.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Powerful Women In The Tech World


