Speakeasy AI Secures Angel Investment Led By Richard Simons

27 Feb 2018

Speakeasy AI Is On A Mission To Deliver The Promise Of Ai In Voice With The Market’s First And Only Speech-To-Intent Solution
Speakeasy AI, the world’s first provider of artificial intelligence via Speech-to-Intent, announced its company launch today, including its confirmed angel investment round led by Richard Simons. Simons, the former founder of Creative Virtual USA, is founding and backing his second venture in the artificial intelligence space, and is excited to enable Speakeasy AI to fill a clearly identified gap in this high velocity market. “For too long, voice automation solutions and digital artificial intelligence have existed in silos, unable to deliver upon their conversational promise and potential. I am incredibly excited to back Speakeasy AI whose mission is to deliver AI understanding in voice channels like never before.”
Simons’ angel investment is being done with a proven team from his prior venture at Creative Virtual USA across several disciplines. This team was instrumental in helping Simons grow Creative Virtual USA to over 40 employees and deliver more Fortune 500 virtual assistant deployments than any other competitor in the United States. Speakeasy AI launches its website today and will be announcing its executive team in a subsequent release.
Speakeasy AI uses the world’s first and only Speech-to-Intent solution to understand customers in their own voice without relying solely upon traditional speech-to-text methods. This revolutionary solution allows for full conversational voice understanding, real-time analytics and rapid deployment cycles. Speakeasy AI is the first and only artificial intelligence company to provide Active Listening Pilots™ which enable enterprises to understand their customers before attempting self-service actions. Speakeasy AI empowers businesses by integrating with existing chatbot or AI platform investments into voice channels.
Speakeasy AI : Our mission is to make it easier for businesses to understand their customers, and deliver the promise of AI in voice channels. Using the world’s first and only Speech-to-Intent™ solution, and our team’s proven expertise, we work tirelessly to provide understanding as a service.
Read More: Mobile World Congress 2018: Highlights From The Pre-Show


