Recruiters Can Connect With Candidates Using AI

21 Jun 2018

Google Hire Was Originally Introduced Last Year As Part Of The G Suite Apps To Make Recruiting And Hiring Easier For SMBs
Google’s Hire platform is getting a new AI (Artificial Intelligence) update which will help recruiters connect with potential candidates faster. Google Hire was originally introduced last year as part of the G suite apps to make recruiting and hiring easier for SMBs.
The update will now make Hire easily complete functions on a one-click basis. Tasks which required clicking on multiple pages to contact candidates or schedule for appointments will now be obsolete with Google’s Hire update making use of AI functions.
Read More: Interview With Dorian Selz, Co-Founder & CEO, Squirro
Some of the improvements Google’s Hire update includes;
Quick Interview Scheduling
Interview schedules involve multiple logistical activities, right from booking conference rooms, managing employee calendars to creating question formats. AI can now automate these processes by dividing time, suggesting slots for interviewees and overall, being a constant form of aid in multiple and repetitive tasks.
Auto-Highlighting of Resumes
Google conducted a research on interactions and noticed recruiters chose “Ctrl+F” function to zero down on certain skills. Now with the AI Google Hire update, Hire can independently scan for acronyms, synonyms and certain terms in the job description that will automatically highlight according to the recruiter’s choice. AI makes the menial task of sifting through documents from monotonous to autonomous and efficient.
Click to Call function
Recruiters always tend to spend a large amount of time on the phone during the recruiting process. These actions could involve holding interviews, offering follow-ups or even going through references. Now here, Hire automates these functions by logging recruiter calls so that team members automatically understand which recruiter has spoken to which candidate- thus making calling easy.
Read More: Interview With Kalin Stoyanchev, Head Of Blockchain + RNDR Project Lead
Conclusion:
Google’s Hire Update has added new AI-powered updates which are ideal for simplifying tasks related to recruiters and hiring managers. Auto-highlighted resumes, auto-scheduled interviews and click to actions bring recruiters the best of AI automated tasks on Google Hire that are certified to shift the focus on candidates and productivity more.


