EPlus To Sponsor The Protecting New York Summit

16 Jul 2018

Sharing IT security insights with public safety leaders and first responder community to support NYC counterterrorism efforts
ePlus inc. announced that that it will be sponsoring and presenting at the Protecting New York Summit being held July 17, 2018, at Baruch College in New York, NY. The summit will offer industry executives, public sector leaders, and academics the opportunity to share ideas about New York’s security strategy and the tools needed to be recognized as a national leader in homeland security and emergency management. The full-day event brings insights and perspectives across industries within New York’s public safety and security initiatives and programs.
Darryl Ramsey, Lead Cybersecurity Architect at ePlus, is participating in the “Maximizing New York’s Security” panel at the Summit. This panel will delve into efforts to combat terrorism and cybersecurity and how to detect and reduce business spying threats, pre-incident indicators to attacks, methods of prevention, protecting vital computer networks and electronic infrastructures, and more. Mr. Ramsey joins a roundtable of leading experts that includes:
Joseph W. Pfeifer, Chief of Counterterrorism and Emergency Preparedness, FDNY
William Sweeney, Jr., Assistant Director in Charge of New York Division, FBI
Geoff Brown, Head of NYC Cyber Command, Chief Information Security Officer, City of New York
Assembly Member Clyde Vanel, Chair, Subcommittee on Internet and New Technology
Stephen Coraggi, Associate Partner, Security Intelligence and Operations Consulting Practice Leader, IBM Security
Follow Us
Darren Raiguel
“ePlus is delighted to participate in the Protecting New York Summit,” said Darren Raiguel, COO of ePlus. “With a strong presence in the NY Metro area, public safety is a high priority for ePlus—for our employees who live and work in NYC as well as the large customer base we serve in this region. We are proud to sponsor this event and share our team’s insight on reducing the complexity to design and implement programs that strengthen an organization’s IT infrastructure in the effort to combat terrorism and cyberterrorism. In addition, as a launch partner for AIRI (the AI-Ready Infrastructure architected by Pure Storage and NVIDIA), we can support the first responder community by applying Artificial Intelligence and Deep Learning to sensor networks, such as video surveillance analysis, shrinking the response time from hours to minutes or less. We look forward to working together with our ecosystem partners to support the counterterrorism teams in their efforts to keep NYC safe.”
Read More: The Three Biggest Industries Who Can Utilize A Language Translation Device


