AutomotiveMastermind Announces ConquestMastermind At The 2018 National Automobile Dealers Association Convention

26 Mar 2018

Conquest marketing technology leverages market-best predictive indicators
automotiveMastermind (Mastermind), the leading predictive analytics and marketing automation solutions for dealerships and manufacturers, announced the launch of its conquestMastermind marketing solution today at the National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA) show, taking place through Sunday, March 25, 2018 in Las Vegas.
automotiveMastermind is a business unit of global business information provider IHS Markit. This is the first conquest-oriented solution based on the integration of Polk Predictive Audiences from IHS Markit, derived from the automotive industry’s most comprehensive, accurate, and timely sources of market, vehicle, and transaction data. conquestMastermind enables dealers to target, engage and win conquest customers like never before.
With an integrated suite of software and services, including Mastermind’s award-winning behavior prediction technology and personalized one-on-one marketing campaigns, as well as comprehensive reporting and analytics, conquestMastermind gives dealers access to one of the most highly-targeted conquest solutions in the industry today, one that will give dealers a distinct advantage over local competitors.
“conquestMastermind leverages modeled data by targeting the exact customers who don’t currently have a sales relationship with a dealer, are in that dealer’s area of influence, and are ready to buy – it’s that simple,” said Johannes Gnauck, Founder and Co-CEO of automotiveMastermind. “Dealers can then see which customers were targeted, why they were targeted and how to contact them with an offer that meets their specific needs. All of this provides awareness and transparency to the customer which helps build better relationships and therefore, sales, by converting previously unknown customers into retention customers.”
Marco Schnabl
“Polk Predictive Audiences from IHS Markit are the driving force behind the quality selection of customers to target,” said Marco Schnabl, Founder and Co-CEO of automotiveMastermind. “The audience data is then integrated into Mastermind’s proven proprietary algorithm. All targeted customers are shown in the intuitive dashboard, and all actions are captured and displayed, along with contact information and then assigned Behavior Prediction Score (BPS)  – a  ranking between 0 and 100, which indicates how likely that customer is to purchase a vehicle. The combination of all this activity streamlines the sales process for dealer partners and for their customers. This is what differentiates Mastermind from other conquest solutions and what makes it revolutionary in the market.”


