Northern Light Delivers First Strategic Research Portal With Integrated Machine Learning Capabilities

06 Dec 2017

Northern Light® announced the first commercial delivery of the machine learning-enabled SinglePoint v11, Northern Light’s platform for competitive intelligence and market research.  The go-live, at an industry-leading computer software company, is the first in a series of customers deployments scheduled for the next quarter, and represents a significant evolutionary step toward the notion of an automated market research assistant.
SinglePoint provides users single-search access to and analysis of primary and licensed secondary research content, relevant social media postings, and business news.  Tens of thousands of marketing, sales, and product development professionals at global enterprises use SinglePoint every month.
SinglePoint v11 features powerful machine learning capabilities for cognitive search based on Google’s TensorFlowlibrary of machine learning algorithms. Northern Light’s machine learning solution enables the system to automatically synthesize, refine, and present critical information distilled from large collections of market intelligence content within a SinglePoint portal.  This changes the search process profoundly.  Use cases include:
“Automated document summaries” – By analyzing each market research or competitive intelligence document, Northern Light’s machine learning algorithms find the important ideas in the report or news article and summarize it in a few pithy and relevant sentences.
“More like this” – The user picks a document that is of interest from the original search result and clicks on the “more like this” button to have SinglePoint rewrite the search query to generate an entire search result of on-target items automatically.
“Recommended reading list” – The system generates content recommendations for the user based on his or her behavior, interests and preferences, determined through automated analysis of user downloads, saves, and shares.  In essence, instead of the user searching for relevant content, the content finds the user.
“Automated search report” – The system examines documents on a search result that contain the most important insights, and then automatically summarizes the insights in an easy to read report format.  Each key point includes links to the underlying documents so users can drilldown to read the original sources to learn more.  Users no longer have to manually examine a list of documents on a search result, they can just read the report.
David Seuss
“The patent-pending automated search report is the feature that has elicited gasps from the audience when we have previewed it with customers,” Northern Light CEO C. David Seuss said.  “We are working towards a future in which the computer is effectively an automated market research assistant.  What if Siri or Cortana could understand business strategy, instead of just helping you find a pizza restaurant?  Imagine having an automated assistant running in the background, all the time, watching the content flow, and then alerting you when there is some new event or item you will care about.  That is the direction in which we are headed, and customers are excited about it.”


