MindBridge Ai Announces Major Enhancements To Its Platform

23 Feb 2018

Award Winning Ai Auditor Extends Leadership with Disruptive Natural Language Processing
MindBridge Ai, an award-winning company, announced enhancements to its core platform, Ai AuditorTM . MindBridge Ai Auditor is an extensible Artificial Intelligence (AI) platform that leverages Machine Learning & Artificial Intelligence to analyze 100% of financial data with greater completeness and assurance for accounting professionals who conduct financial audits.
MindBridge continues to extend the leadership position of the Ai Auditor by adding patent pending Natural Language Processing (NLP) that allows audit professionals to naturally ask questions of their transactions and immediately get focused on potential errors and risky transactions. This is a first of a kind capability bringing unprecedented ease of use and efficiency to the audit practice. Other key features include out of the box integration with QuickBooks Online, Intacct & NetSuite; tailored analysis for General Ledger and Accounts Payable as well as 20+ financial reports including income statement, financial trending and ratio analysis.
“Adopting AI will enable us to lead the way in audit analytics in the UK, while its increased speed and efficiency will add even more value to the audit process,” said Becky Shields, Partner, Kingston Smith.
MindBridge Ai has received support from the Canadian Technology Accelerator (CTA) program. The CTA program helps Canadian enterprises expand to key markets abroad by providing access to key resources, as well as enhanced Trade Commissioner support.
“As a global hub for finance and technology, London is a natural city for innovative Canadian firms to put down roots and establish an international presence,” said Janice Charette, Canada’s High Commissioner to the United Kingdom. “The Government of Canada is committed to increasing trade opportunities in the UK. Supporting companies such as MindBridge Ai by fostering these kind of initiatives is a key component of our Trade Commissioner Services.”
Launched in February 2017, Ai Auditor has been recognized recently by Accounting Today Magazine as a Top New Product of 2018 for its ability to create a comprehensive analysis and prioritize entries for investigation by auditors.
Eli Fathi
“We wish to democratise the use of AI for all auditors. With this latest update, MindBridge Ai has demonstrated its continued commitment to delivering to auditors an extensible, leading edge platform in order to provide maximum value to their clients. UK is an important market for us and we are already working with leading audit firms such as Kingston Smith. We would also like to acknowledge the support of Canadian Technology Accelerator United Kingdom for their assistance in supporting us in our UK outreach and operations,” said Eli Fathi, CEO of MindBridge Ai.
MindBridge Ai is a venture-backed FinTech company based in Ottawa, Canada. Through the application of machine learning and artificial intelligence technologies, the MindBridge platform detects anomalous patterns of activities, unintentional errors and intentional misstatements. Using the MindBridge Ai-Auditor, organizations across multiple industries can minimize financial loss, reduce corporate liability and can focus on providing higher value services to their clients.
Read More: Prophesee Announces Initial Closing Of $19M Funding


