InsideSales.com Renews Partnership With American Association Of Inside Sales Professionals

28 Mar 2018

Organizations aim to strengthen growing inside sales market; InsideSales.com to serve as marquee sponsor at AA-ISP Leadership Summit in April
–InsideSales.com, the No. 1 artificial intelligence (AI) growth platform for sales, today announced it has renewed its long-standing partnership with the American Association of Inside Sales Professionals (AA-ISP) to help strengthen the inside sales industry. AA-ISP, the worldwide association dedicated to the advancement of the inside sales profession, provides a place for like-minded professionals to learn best practices in the structure, people, and processes that allow them to further the inside sales industry and their careers.
David Elkington
“Our recent research shows the inside sales profession is on an upward trajectory,” said Dave Elkington, CEO, InsideSales.com. “According to The State of Sales report, which we created in 2017 in partnership with AA-ISP, inside sales professionals now represent nearly half of the entire sales workforce in the United States, and their numbers are growing. We expect this trend to continue, as sales leaders believe that in a truly effective sales organization, there should be an equal split between inside sales and outside sales professionals.”
For the State of Sales report, InsideSales.com Labs polled 1,151 companies across the focus areas of structure, systems and people to determine what strategies they use to win sales. In addition to confirming the growth of the inside sales industry, the report showed the time spent selling remotely by field sales reps increased 89 percent (24 percent to 45 percent) from 2013 to 2017. Sales leaders report “increased productivity” is the number one motivation for creating inside sales teams.
Bob Perkins
“Sales is still not taught in the curriculum of most universities, so it’s up to us and companies like InsideSales.com to help educate the next generation on the benefits of inside sales professionals,” said Bob Perkins, founder & chairman, AA-ISP. “Combine the research from AA-ISP with InsideSales.com Labs’ best practices, and you have a powerful guide for sales strategies that are proven to work in today’s shifting markets.”
As part of the renewed partnership, InsideSales.com—AA-ISP’s Acceleration Service Provider of the Year in 2016—will be a marquee sponsor for the organization’s Leadership Summit, the largest gathering of inside sales leaders, to be held April 3-5 in Chicago.


