Announcing AI Breakthrough’s Inaugural Award Winners Across Robotics, NLP, Intelligent Assistants

05 Jul 2018

The Program Attracted More Than 2,500 Award Nominations From Over 15 Different Countries Throughout The World
AI Breakthrough, an independent organization that recognizes the top companies, technologies and products in the global Artificial Intelligence (AI) market, today announced the winners of the inaugural AI Breakthrough Awards program. The winning AI Breakthrough selections showcase AI and machine learning technologies and companies that have both succeeded in pushing ingenuity and exemplifying the best in AI solutions across the globe.
“The global AI market is expected to be worth over seven billion dollars this year, and the industry is growing exponentially with numerous exciting technological developments progressing daily,” said James Johnson, managing director at AI Breakthrough. “With this amazing rate of market growth and development, AI Breakthrough is determined to recognize the standout AI solutions and companies. We are grateful for all of the nominations submitted and we are thrilled to announce the results of our inaugural program. Congratulations to all of our 2018 AI Breakthrough Award winners.”
The AI Breakthrough Awards program recognizes the artificial intelligence innovators, leaders and visionaries from around the world in a range of categories, including AI Platforms, Smart Robotics, Business Intelligence, Virtual Agents and Bots, Natural Language Processing, industry-specific AI applications and many more. The program attracted more than 2,500 award nominations from over 15 different countries throughout the world.
Read More: AgEagle’s Drone Imagery To Help Reduce Chemicals In Food
Winning products and companies were selected based on a variety of criteria, including most innovative and technologically advanced products and services, with the ultimate goal of recognizing the “Break Through” nominations for AI technologies and companies.
The 2018 AI Breakthrough Award winners include:
 AI Industry Leadership 
Best Artificial Intelligence CEO: Jensen Huang, NVIDIA  : NVIDIA is the world leader in visual computing. The GPU, our invention, serves as the visual cortex of modern computers and is at the heart of our products and services. This plays a huge role in a wide variety of applications—from rendering to self-driving cars. Here, it’s critical for the development of intuitive digital user interfaces and the detection, recognition, and processing of what’s on the road ahead to assist the driver.
Best AI Startup: Fusemachines
Best Overall AI Solution: Verint, Intelligent Self-Service
Best Overall AI Company: Google
AI Platforms 
Best Machine Learning Platform: Veritone : Veritone unlocks the power of cognitive computing to automatically generate actionable insights, previously inaccessible to organizations in their audio, video and other data sources.
Best Machine Learning Company: Infinia ML
Best Deep Learning Platform: Deep Cognition
Best Overall AI Platform: Qualcomm, Snapdragon Neural Processing SDK
Business Intelligence and Analytics 
Best Predictive Analytics Platform: Ambyint : Ambyint has been delivering best-in-class artificial lift optimization solutions to E&P customers since 2004. The company was founded in Calgary, Alberta as Pumpwell Solutions with the mission to improve artificial lift performance and production by leveraging proprietary mathematics. Ambyint began selling its market-leading controllers and VFD packages to customers in Canada in 2006, and by 2012 was actively acquiring data, monitoring, and optimizing over 1,000 horizontal and vertical wells across Western Canada with its solution.
Best Predictive Analytics Solution: Sundown.ai
Best Behavioral AI Solution: Knowmail
Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
Best Natural Language Understanding (NLU) Solution: True AI : We provide the essential AI component to your customer support conversations. All of our software is accessible in the cloud or on-premises and protected with state-of-the-art data storage and networking security solutions.
Best Conversational Interface: SoundHound
Best NLP Platform: Sinequa
Virtual Agents and Bots 
Best Intelligent Personal Assistant: x.ai : Founded in 2014, x.ai is a hardcore technology company with a mission to democratize the personal assistant. We’ve created Amy and Andrew Ingram, autonomous AI assistants who schedule meetings for you. We believe in invisible software, kindness as a design principle, and the power of AI to increase human potential.
Best Chatbot Solution: Progress, NativeChat
Robotics 
Innovation Award for Cognitive Robotics: Intuition Robotics: Intuition Robotics is the creator of ElliQ™, the Active Aging Companion, which helps older adults stay active and engaged with a proactive social robot that overcomes the digital divide.
The company’s AI cognitive computing technology, award-winning design, and intuitive interaction models provide a natural way for older adults to reap the benefits of technology without the need to master the tools. The company was founded in 2016 and is based in Israel with offices in California. Intuition Robotics has raised over $20M in funding and is supported by renowned industry experts.
Best Overall Robotics Company: Airobotics
Read More: Working Together To Strengthen The Lives Of Rural Americans
Decision Management 
Best Decision Management Solution: Pipeline
Robotic Process Automation (RPA) 
Best Robotic Process Automation Solution: Myndshft, M:IATM  Myndshft is working at the intersection of blockchain and artificial intelligence. Through CognitiveBus – a first of its kind – cognitive blockchain platform, Myndshft Technologies is simplifying enterprise-grade AI and unlocking the insights hidden in the massive and growing data universe.
Best Robotic Process Automation Company: Blue Prism
Virtual Reality 
Best Use of Virtual Reality for Enterprise Applications: Alcatel-Lucent Enterprise : We are ALE, serving more than 830,000 customers worldwide under the Alcatel-Lucent Enterprise brand. Alongside our partners, we make everything connect by tailoring award-winning solutions to your organization – your people, processes and customers – helping your business compete in a digital world.
Best Overall VR Company: Oculus VR
Industry Vertical Applications 
Best AI-based Solution for CyberSecurity: ExtraHop : You deserve full visibility into all tiers of your IT environment, as well as the insights that lie untapped in your wire data—insights that can help you increase security, drive down costs, optimize efficiency, and improve end-user experience. We exist to help you fully access your wire data and uncover those insights. It really is that simple.
Best AI-based Solution for Financial Services: Sage, Pegg
Best AI-based Solution for Healthcare: Curematch
Best AI-based Solution for Transportation: Netradyne
Best AI-based Solution for Manufacturing: Citrine Informatics
Best AI-based Solution for Advertising: AdTheorent
Best AI-based Solution for Marketing: Invoca
Best AI-based Solution for Education: Osmo
Part of the Tech Breakthrough Awards organization, the AI Breakthrough Awards program is devoted to honoring excellence in Artificial Intelligence technologies, services, companies and products. The AI Breakthrough Awards provide public recognition for the achievements of AI companies and products in categories including AI Platforms, Robotics, Business Intelligence, AI Hardware, NLP, Vision, Biometrics, industry vertical AI applications and more.
Read More: World Cup 2018: Avid Maestro Graphics Systems Give AR Capabilities For Globo’s Coverage


