Bosch And Mojio To Deliver Advanced Connected Car Services

02 Jul 2018

Organizations Will Focus On Connected Services For Both Manufacturers And Consumers; Initial Focus On Vehicle Communication, Diagnostics And Crash Detection, Notification
After announcing the debut of its new Connected Mobility Solutions global division at the beginning of 2018, Bosch continues to build its capabilities in the area of mobility services. Today, the global provider of technology and services announced a strategic investment in Mojio, a technology platform and SaaS provider for connected cars, as well as an innovation agreement to co-develop a suite of advanced connected car services.
Founded in 2012, Mojio has teams in Vancouver, Palo Alto and Sofia. The organization has developed a range of connected car solutions, including its hardware agnostic cloud platform, mobile apps for consumers and small businesses, and services for big data analytics. Mojio has gathered real-world data from more than 7 billion miles of driving as part of its platform service that delivers connected car experiences to subscribers of major network operators in North America and Europe, such as Deutsche Telekom, T-Mobile US and TELUS.
As part of the innovation agreement, Bosch and Mojio will co-develop solutions in focused areas, beginning with vehicle communication and diagnostics as well as crash detection and notification.
Mike Mansuetti
“The extensive data we’ve derived from our portfolio of diagnostic solutions has given us invaluable insights that can be the basis for solutions that bring great value to consumers and OEMs,” said Mike Mansuetti, president of Bosch in North America.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections
Bosch’s strategic investment was part of the Mojio’s Series B funding round. Terms of Bosch’s strategic investment in Mojio will not be disclosed.
Kenny Hawk
“The Mojio platform combined with Bosch’s immense automotive expertise will empower us to accelerate the development and deployment of advanced connected car services to automakers, mobile network operators and consumers around the world,” said Mojio CEO Kenny Hawk.
Open, scalable and hardware agnostic, Mojio is the cloud platform of choice for the deployment of secure connected car apps and services. Mojio’s platform delivers a smarter, safer and more convenient car ownership experience to subscribers of major wireless carriers, including Bell Canada, Deutsche Telekom, Rogers Communications, T-Mobile and TELUS. With real-world data gathered from more than 7 billion miles of driving, Mojio provides a big data analytics framework that uses machine learning to generate actionable insights and unlock new revenue streams for companies throughout the automotive value chain.
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance


