Cloudera Appoints Amy O’Connor To Chief Data And Information Officer

06 Feb 2018

O’Connor Joined Cloudera In 2013 And Has Since Been Leading Cloudera’s Team Of Industry Experts And Business Value Consultants
Cloudera, Inc, the modern platform for machine learning and analytics, optimized for the cloud, announced that Amy O’Connor has been promoted to Cloudera’s senior management team as the company’s Chief Data and Information Officer (CDIO). O’Connor will lead a new team that will include customer digital experience, internal business systems, data science and analytics, IT operations and information security – focused on building new technologies and setting new standards for organizations with a “data-first” mindset.
Tom Reilly
“As our Cloudera CDIO, Amy will be a key driver of innovation to support Cloudera’s IT environment as a resource for our engineering, support, sales, and marketing teams as well as driving customer satisfaction,” said Tom Reilly, chief executive officer at Cloudera. “We look forward to the many contributions Amy will bring to Cloudera in her new role as she drives initiatives to better serve our customers, partners and employees using data, analytics and cloud-based services.”
Amy O’Connor
O’Connor joined Cloudera in 2013 and has since been leading Cloudera’s team of industry experts and business value consultants. This team advises and guides organizations as they introduce Cloudera solutions and adopt an enterprise-wide, repeatable data-driven delivery capability. O’Connor was also responsible for helping Cloudera customers identify and address process and organizational challenges that impact the adoption of their data-driven solutions.
O’Connor came to Cloudera from Nokia, where she built and led their global data and analytics team and where she was an early Cloudera customer. Prior to Nokia, she led marketing and engineering teams at Sun Microsystems, as vice president of services marketing and head of strategy for software and storage.
“I am excited to bring our data-driven initiatives to a greater level of maturity here at Cloudera, where we run our business on our own Cloudera Enterprise Data Hub along with a combination of other cloud-based services. And also I look forward to continuing to share our data-driven best practices with our customers – assisting them in raising their own maturity in using data and Cloudera’s products and services to run their businesses,” said O’Connor.
At Cloudera, we believe that data can make what is impossible today, possible tomorrow. We empower people to transform complex data into clear and actionable insights. We deliver the modern platform for machine learning and analytics optimized for the cloud. The world’s largest enterprises trust Cloudera to help solve their most challenging business problems.


