Trescon’s World Blockchain Summit To Touchdown In Frankfurt

22 May 2018

Frankfurt’s Edition of World Blockchain Summit Aims To Connect Global Blockchain Experts And Technology Players in This Space Including Emerging Start-Ups Along With Regional Businesses and IT Leaders From Across Key Industry Verticals
Germany is setting the bar high when it comes to the adoption of blockchain technology. Whilst most countries are focused mostly on the financial and banking sector or even cryptocurrency, Germany has adopted blockchain technology into the energy and aerospace sector with over 110 potential-use cases. Moreover, more than 30 fully funded startups are working solely towards blockchain in the ‘Clean energy’ segment as well! This is probably why the European Union has announced blockchain as their priority for the year including a proposed 30 billion Euro funding into the development of this technology.
Trescon’s World Blockchain Summit is taking place on 25 – 26 June 2018 at The Marriot Frankfurt. The summit is being officially endorsed by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (giz), the Blockchain Bundesverband and the Frankfurt School Blockchain Center.
The summit also gives rise to blockchain startups to meet and interact with some of the biggest names in the industry, as well as meet international venture capitalists to whom they can pitch their ideas and secure the assistance to catapult their business further.
Mohammed Saleem (right)
Mohammed Saleem, CEO of Trescon, said that “The European market is a boiling plate ready to explode into the blockchain market. There are 30+ startups in Germany alone, and the rest of the continent is ripe, ready to be plucked. The summit will provide a platform for these enterprises to enjoy the fruit of their labour, as well as expose the continent to the blockchain race.”
After Frankfurt, World Blockchain Summit Series will travel to Singapore, Canada, India, Dubai, Malaysia and Saudi Arabia to end the calendar year of 2018.
Read More: Oracle Blockchain Cloud Service And Financial Services Enable Next-Gen Blockchain Innovators
Here’s a list of the speakers we are looking forward to;
TAAVI ROIVAS
Ex-Prime Minister of Estonia and Member of the Estonian Parliament
Rõivas is an Estonian politician, former leader of the Reform Party and former Prime Minister of Estonia. He graduated from Tallinn Secondary Science School and from the Faculty of Economics and Business Administration of the University of Tartu in international economics and marketing.
JULIE MAUPIN
Director of Social Impact & Public Regulatory Affairs – IOTA Foundation, Fintech Advisor – German Ministry of Finance
Julie Maupin began her career in the non-profit sector in the mid-1990s. Working in relief and development in Bihać, Bosnia taught her that human rights and individual economic empowerment are inextricably linked. This discovery later led her to study both law and economics and think deeply about the interconnections between the two.
NICK AYTON
Founder, Chainstarter
Nick finds himself involved in many aspects of the Blockchain and Crypto Revolution. He advises several Family Offices and handles their crypto investment activities. He is also the Co-founder of a next-generation Token Launch Platform Chainstarter for ICOs, a Crypto Exchange for Security Tokens, Chainstarter TV, a new crypto gameshow concept. He is an Advisor and Chair for  Crypto Fund, one of the world’s largest Blockchain events.
KRIS BENNETT
Founder, Blockchain Influencer, Blockchain Beard Guy
Kris is one of the most influential blockchain experts with a 20-year background in custom software design, delivery, and consulting.
Read More: “At The World AI Show, The Priority Is Not To Sell But Generate Awareness” – Mohammed Saleem, CEO, Trescon
MARLOES POMP
Program Manager Blockchain, Dutch Government
Marloes Pomp is one of the most prominent personalities in the Blockchain industry working on building a connection between various governments and the blockchain. Currently, she is the project leader of thirty blockchain projects within the Dutch Government. Apart from that, she has done several pilot projects in the Netherlands, and now is helping those projects reach the next level.
MARCELLA ATZORI
Blockchain Advisor, European Commission
Marcella Atzori is a blockchain governance expert and an academic researcher, currently affiliated with the University College of London, Center for Blockchain Technologies, and the Iran Blockchain Lab, established in the Sharif University of Technology, Teheran.
She is specialized in technopolitics, digital innovation and alternative models of governance, with a focus on blockchain-based applications and decentralized architectures for Public Administration and e-government.
SVEN LAEPPLE
Founder & CEO – ASTRATUM,
Founding Member – German Blockchain Association
Sven is a digital innovator, co-founded the interactive integrator and incubator BLUE C AG ( IPO in 2000). He worked in senior positions for Vodafone Global, Deutsche Telekom, T-Mobile International, T-Systems International, Bank Austria and I-D Media at the intersection of strategy, innovation, technology and marketing.
Sven has an MBA from the University of Mannheim, Germany, studied cryptocurrency at the University of Nicosia and at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) blockchain and smart contracts as well as Fintech and future commerce.
ROBERT SCHWERTNER
Social Media Influencer, Crypto Blogger
This is how CryptoRobby describes himself; I dream of applications beyond Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies serving the people. My mission: supporting blockchain use cases with an added value to society, a #ReturnonSociety (#RoS). Currently, I am developing indicators to measure societal impact.
Read More: How Do You Close The Diversity Gap In Technology Companies?
PETER M MORICZ
Founder, Moricz.io
Peter is a successful advisor to numerous Token Offerings. He brings a wealth of first-hand knowledge and expertise to this ever-evolving business. His focus is mainly on the EU, and he has a global network of partners who are highly respected in the Blockchain community.
SERGEY VOROPAEV
CEO, Crypto Syndicate
Crypto Syndicate is creating investment hubs with corporate tracking programs across the world. Right now Crypto Syndicate is opening its first offline HUB & tracking program for IT and blockchain projects in Tallinn – with the support of Estonian government.
Read More: Poland Is World’s First To Put Banking Records On The Blockchain


