PCS Edventures! And Blocksmith, Inc. Announce Partnership

17 Apr 2018

STEM Education Professionals and Virtual Reality Experts Unite to bring Emerging Tech to the Classroom
PCS Edventures!.com, Inc., (PCSV) a leading provider of K-12 Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) programs, today announced a joint-partnership with Blocksmith, Inc., a Boise-based, virtual reality software and design company.
Virtual reality (VR) technologies are advancing at an incredible rate, solidifying the science behind one of today’s fastest growing markets as crucial knowledge for students learning during the Age of Technology. Estimated to be a 75 billion dollar market by 2021, VR is quickly integrating itself into every aspect of life today. To bring the immense potential of VR to students around the globe, PCS Edventures and Blocksmith, Inc. have teamed up to advance the evolution of virtual reality by giving students a peek behind the curtain with the ability to create their own virtual content.
Michelle Fisher
“The VR technology available to the average user today is incredibly advanced. From gaming systems to virtual Biology class, we knew bringing VR to the classroom was imperative,” said Michelle Fisher, Director of Curriculum at PCS Edventures. “On top of being downright fun, the Blocksmith software allows students to become not just consumers but creators as they sculpt virtual landscapes and interact with video game development techniques, opening countless future career and learning opportunities.”
Markus Nigrin
PCS Edventures and Blocksmith, Inc. have come together to provide an educational software license, a specialized expansion to the web-based Blocksmith Builder which provides additional support materials, curriculum lessons and extensions and full domain control for classrooms to create a secure and distraction-free environment to trade and share virtual experiences.
“We’re excited about the joint venture to bring virtual reality to the classroom,” said Markus Nigrin, CEO of Blocksmith. “With their high-quality, hands-on approach to STEM education and our one-of-a-kind software focused on putting the power in the hands on the user, this partnership gives any classroom exactly what they need to effectively and efficiently implement a 3D video game making program with a strong VR/AR component.”
 


