Affluent Attaché Launches Its AI And Blockchain Driven Platform

05 Feb 2018

Affluent Attaché, a Leading Elite High Tech Concierge Club, Recently Launched Their Decentralized Blockchain And AI Powered Platform
Since the club’s inception as a division of Intervallo Consulting Group Inc. in 2010 it has worked on major campaigns with companies like Tesla, Longines (Bill Gates, Rockefeller, Casiraghi families were in attendance among others), Mr. Pink Ginseng Drink, Tonino Lamborghini mobile, family offices among others.
The new technology will facilitate streamlined, secure and fast servicing of their corporate and individual private clientele.
The Affluent Attaché platform has also introduced bitcoin cryptocurrency payments, to supplement other payments like MasterCard, Visa and American Express.
Clients will enjoy 25-50% off negotiated rates on services like luxury hotels, private jets, yachts, fine dining, high end private auctions, access to VIP events like Grand Luxury Seduction, Super Bowl, Grammys, Cannes Film Festival, World Economic Forum (WEF), SXSW, Burning Man, Art Basel, etc.
In addition, clients can now earn double or triple points on signing up through their Attaché wallet. The rewards points can be used towards select services on the platform.
Affluent Attaché is a high-end, exclusive worldwide concierge club catering to the 1% club with a trusted and experienced partner network offering luxury lifestyle management, membership-only experience, with the main objective of providing unrivalled ‘on-demand’ and ‘new-luxury’ concierge services.
The membership has five exemplary concierge service levels both in private for individuals and Corporate Attaché for companies. For private attaché, ‘Imperator’ is the supreme and it’s by invitation only, ‘Elite’ is the second highest, followed by ‘Platinum’ and lastly the ‘Gold’ package. Corporate Attaché is geared towards executives/corporations and their extended network of influence.
Based on your membership level, Affluent Attaché has an assortment of luxury services that include one of the kind concierge medicine (doctors on call & for travel), wealth management, global travel network in more than 70 countries and seductive vacation locales, property management and household services, global opulent events encompassing festivals, awards, galas and sports, bespoke iconic gifting and sourcing, relocation services, restaurants and fine dining at those sought after hidden gems, tailored lavish event planning and management.


