FogHorn Highlights The Value Of Edge Intelligence At The 2018 Sensors Expo & Conference

25 Jun 2018

Edge Computing, Which Includes Edge Analytics, Machine Learning And Artificial Intelligence, Is A Highly Innovative Approach To Data Processing Which Is Quickly Picking Up Traction In The IIoT Market
FogHorn, a leading developer of edge intelligence software for industrial and commercial Internet of Things (IoT) solutions, today announced its director of product management, Ramya Ravichandar, will present at Sensors Expo & Conference. The event will take place in San Jose from June 26-28.
Ramya will define “real edge” intelligence, which provides real-time CEP-based streaming analytics, iterative machine learning on live industrial data, radically lower data persistence and transport requirements, and more. She will outline the technical and economic benefits of edge computing, citing impactful use cases to help drive home the value of edge intelligence for industrial companies.
WHAT: “Edge Intelligence: The Future of IIoT and Why You Need It Now”
WHEN: June 27, 2018 at 10:00 – 10:50 a.m. PDT
WHERE: Meeting room 211CD, McEnery Convention Center, 150 W San Carlos Street, San Jose, CA 95113
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
Edge computing, which includes edge analytics, machine learning and artificial intelligence, is a highly innovative approach to data processing which is quickly picking up traction in the IIoT market. HPE quoted Gartner saying that by 2022, some 75 percent of enterprise-generated data will be created and processed outside the traditional, centralized data center or cloud, up from less than 10 percent in 2018.1
“Rapid adoption of edge intelligence by industrial companies is a critical component to their digital transformation initiatives,” said Ramya Ravichandar, director of product management of FogHorn Systems. “Integrating true edge intelligence can yield exponential benefits for organizations, even those in traditional vertical markets. For example, one of the world’s leading providers of elevators, escalators and moving walks collaborated with FogHorn to enhance its elevator performance – improving elevator runtimes as well as decreasing service disruption and inspection fees, which can cost about $2,000 per event.”
FogHorn is a leading developer of “edge intelligence” software for industrial and commercial IoT application solutions. FogHorn’s software platform brings the power of advanced analytics and machine learning to the on-premises edge environment enabling a new class of applications for advanced monitoring and diagnostics, machine performance optimization, proactive maintenance and operational intelligence use cases. FogHorn’s technology is ideally suited for OEMs, systems integrators and end customers in manufacturing, power and water, oil and gas, renewable energy, mining, transportation, healthcare, retail, as well as smart grid, smart city, smart building and connected vehicle applications.
FogHorn and Lightning are trademarks of FogHorn Systems. The names of actual companies and products mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their respective owners.
Read More: Mensia Technologies Raises 1.3 Million Euro To Introduce Koala Neurofeedback In Europe


