Hikvision And VIAAS Technology Partnership Offers Scalable And Simple ‘Video Surveillance As A Service Solution’ With RMR Opportunity

20 Mar 2018

Security cameras connect automatically to VIAAS Secure Cloud
Hikvision USA, a leading provider of artificial intelligence, machine learning, robotics and other emerging technologies, and the world’s largest manufacturer of video surveillance products and solutions, today announced a partnership with integrated cloud-based video surveillance provider VIAAS, that offers integrators a fully integrated VSaaS (video surveillance as a service) solution and an opportunity to earn recurring revenue annually from each active security camera.
VIAAS delivers best-in-class cloud-connected video surveillance.
The VIAAS-Hikvision solution features preconfigured Hikvision surveillance cameras that connect automatically to the VIAAS Secure Cloud. Deploying the system is simple, seamless, and there is no need for DVRs, NVRs, servers or software. With no limits on cameras, users or locations, the solution is perfect for very small to very large camera counts. It is ideal for multi-site, multi-user accounts, and users with a need for role-based access.
Benefits include:
Zero-configuration on most networks
No DVR, NVR, hard drives, software
Multiple U.S. patents deliver industry-leading technology including Bandwidth Shaping™ and IntelEvents™
Browser and/or iOS/Android mobile app account access
VIAAS Secure Cloud – Monitor unlimited sites, cameras and users from one account
Video stored by time not volume
Role-based multi-site, multi-user access
Multiple camera models and multiple service plans to fit budget and monitoring needs
VIAAS Active Software automatically updates cameras with the latest firmware
VIAAS also provides many other services to its integrator partners. “We offer pre-sales support including web demos, demo cameras and training to VARs and integrators,” said Matt Connolly, president of VIAAS, Inc. “VIAAS will also provide training at no additional charge to customers and their users as part of the service.”
 


