Triller Raises $5M Series A To Democratize Music Video Creation

12 Feb 2018

Social app allows users to create celeb-quality music videos in seconds.
Triller, the AI-powered music video platform, today announces a $5MSeries A funding round led by Carnegie Technologies. With over 23M downloads worldwide, Triller democratizes the music video creation process, making it easy for users to create and share celeb-quality music videos, instantly. The funds will be used to build out the platform’s AI-backed production technology, which automates the video editing process to drive better talent discovery on Triller and across social networks. Triller plans to deploy a machine learning algorithm that optimizes user engagement through music, social and watch behavior.
Mike Lu
“Digital natives are content machines, constantly searching for new ways to take the content they create and share with their social followings to the next level. Triller helps its users do just that, in a matter of seconds and at no cost,” said Triller CEO, Mike Lu. “This funding round puts us closer to our goal of making Triller the go-to platform to not only create beautiful videos, but also for talent discovery. Our investment into Triller’s patented AI technology, which breaks apart a song into rhythmic beats and combines that with the biometric movements within a video, will directly impact and enhance our ability to help artists and users on the platform grow their following and fanbase.”
Triller has grown to more than 23M downloads with zero marketing and ad spend to date, and is used organically by celebrities such as Kevin Hart, Vanessa Hudgens, Taylor Hill and Kaskade to create professional-looking music videos. About 90 percent of hip hop songs from the past decade are available to use in Triller’s extensive song library, among other genres. To use Triller, users simply choose from the app’s library, film multiple takes or import videos, and then the app automatically arranges the takes into a final video. Up and coming talent can share their videos with others on the platform’s discovery feed, which acts as its own social network, or across other social channels such as Instagram and Facebook.
Triller is headquartered in San Francisco and has offices and ambassadors in three additional US cities including Los Angeles, New York and Miami, and two international offices in Paris and Lisbon. The platform, available on iOS and Android, recently became ranked number 12 app in the US App Store and number five in the French App Store, both under the video category.
Triller received its first seed round of $4.5M from angel investors, which closed in May of 2016. This Series A round comes from Carnegie Technologies, bringing the total amount of funding to $9.5M.


