Kalibrate Blockchain Adopting Charter For Fully-Autonomous Patient Index

02 Jul 2018

Commonly-curated index solves key health information transaction issues
Kalibrate Blockchain, Inc., is adopting a charter to develop a commonly curated, fully autonomous Universal Patient Index. The Index will be universally accessible without limitation by enterprise or political boundaries. It overcomes the biggest challenge in the health information world, which is the lack of a universal patient identity that can easily be bound among disparate health information systems.
For healthcare providers and enterprises, the Index facilitates rapid, efficient binding of patient health identities across healthcare transactions. It also tracks and logs health information associated with each patient. These functions are accomplished in strict compliance with HIPAA, GDPR, IHE, and other applicable regulatory regimes and industry standards.
Follow Us
Patients benefit by maintaining sovereign control over their own patient identities and personal health information. They also can expect to receive more fully-informed treatment and services from healthcare providers.
During the initial “bootstrapping stage,” Kalibrate Blockchain is launching the blockchain-based distributed autonomous index network. The network’s “undiscoverable association algorithm” prevents both accidental and deliberately malicious association between patient identities and patient health information.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc
Calvin Wiese
“The Universal Patient Index, along with its associated services, is the missing link in the world of patient health information transactions,” says Calvin Wiese, president of Kalibrate Blockchain, Inc. “It will achieve its purpose when the initial bootstrapping stage terminates and the Index reaches full autonomy.”
To incentivize the use and operation of the Index, Kalibrate Blockchain will issue Kalibrate Coin cryptocurrency in a regulatory compliant manner that will be readily tradable. Once the Index has achieved target autonomy, Kalibrate Blockchain will continue to engage in activities that drive its adoption.
Kalibrate Blockchain, Inc., located in Orlando, Florida, is a Wyoming corporation engaged in the development of a Universal Patient Index and associated services to facilitate secure, efficient, and regulatory compliant binding of patient identities and tracking of patient health information. The Kalibrate Blockchain team has extensive experience in health information management, healthcare problem-solving, medical records, computer science, healthcare finance, and biotech.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications


