Austin-Based AI Startup Partners With Leaders From NBA, NHL, NCAA

16 Jan 2018

piLYTIX Sports Q Announces New Board Members
piLYTIX Sports, provider of AI technologies for sales and marketing professionals, is pleased to announce its newly formed Board of Advisors.
The inaugural board members are piLYTIX Sports clients and industry leaders who have developed best-in-class strategies for maximizing revenue in the face of uncertain ticket and sponsorship demand. With the support, perspective and advice of these members, piLYTIX Sports will continue to innovate and advance its explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) services to further meet the needs of its growing client base.
The inaugural members include:
Craig Pintens – Senior Associate Athletic Director, University of Oregon
David Elgin – Vice President of Analytics, Atlanta Hawks
Jamie Morningstar – Senior Vice President of Ticket Sales and Service, Milwaukee Bucks
Mike Broeker –  Deputy Director of Athletics, Marquette University
Teri Pierce – Senior Associate Athletics Director, University of Texas at Austin
Scott Shafer – Director of CRM, Milwaukee Bucks
Sean Ream – Vice President of Ticket Sales and Service, Colorado Avalanche, Kroenke Sports & Entertainment
Jim Dries
“We are so pleased to have such innovative thought leaders joining us,” said Jim Dries, CEO of parent company piLYTIX. “With the help of these industry leaders, we will continue to enhance our existing A.I. platform and build new products that will accelerate sales growth in a rapidly evolving industry. We are honored to be working with them.”
piLYTIX Sports helps sports teams achieve their maximum sales and marketing potential through a technical platform driven by explainable artificial intelligence. piLYTIX Sports was launched as a division of piLYTIX in 2017 as teams and leagues have realized the value in importing data-driven sales and marketing strategies from other industries in the face of falling ticket demand.
Our platform offers a completely unique strategy for your organization to increase revenue while simultaneously reducing the inefficiencies that have come to define so many sports sales and marketing organizations.


