Monetate Enhances Personalization Engine With Addition Of Expanded Insights

14 Feb 2018

New capability arms brands with artificial intelligence-based automated segment discovery
Monetate, the worldwide leader in personalization, today announced a major enhancement to the Monetate Intelligent Personalization Engine, which allows marketers to use artificial intelligence to power real-time, cross-channel personalization. The new capability, Individual Fit Insights, provides a highly specialized view into how individualized decisions are made.
The @monetate personalization engine is adding new capabilities with #IndividualFitInsights
Individual Fit Experiences, Monetate’s capability for delivering individualized experiences, uses artificial intelligence to decide which experience is best suited for each individual customer based on all of the data available about them. Individual Fit Insights helps brands understand how these decisions were made and provides automated segment discovery. Frequently, AI models prevent the marketers from understanding exactly why the AI made the decision it did. Monetate believes that black box technology is a barrier to the adoption of AI and is committed to providing a level of transparency not seen in other personalization platforms.
Specifically, the insights surface the most influential data categories used in individual decisions. It aggregates these insights at the experience level. With this information, marketers will learn which variants resonate with which audiences, giving them directional insight into how to think about their audiences and develop experiences for them. It also helps to confirm or challenge any hypothesis about shoppers, so brands can make the best decisions going forward.
David Brussin
“Since Monetate was founded 10 years ago, we’ve pushed the technical boundaries of what’s possible, building a world where brands are empowered to offer individualized experiences to each person they connect with,” said David Brussin, founder, chairman and chief product officer, Monetate. “Today’s release marks the latest in our efforts to turn our personalization vision into reality by taking our analysis of customer behavior a layer deeper. Individual Fit Insights allows marketers to deliver the right experience while simultaneously learning about their audiences – a win-win for brands and consumers.”
The Engine was launched in April 2017 to address the market need to personalize experiences at the individual level at scale, and at a time customers were ready for highly customized experiences. Last month, Monetate unveiled enhancements to The Engine designed to bridge the gap between digital and physical touchpoints, making these individualized experiences capable of being delivered in-store as well.
Monetate worked closely with customers to ensure the solution would drive maximum business results and to enable marketers to act on valuable data. Users of The Engine will benefit from Individual Fit Insights by better understanding what’s working and what’s not from a content perspective and for whom – insight that informs the experiences brands design and maximizes return on creative. It’s now available to all Monetate Intelligent Personalization Engine customers.


