PolyU Launches University Research Facility In Big Data Analytics

11 May 2018

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU) establishes today the University Research Facility in Big Data Analytics (UBDA), the first university-wide research facility in big data analytics among universities in Hong Kong. Equipped with big data expertise in PolyU and the most advanced computing infrastructure and tools today, UBDA is expected to foster cross-disciplinary research collaborations in PolyU, establish a strong partnership with industries on big data analytics applications, and promote big data education in Hong Kong.
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU) establishes today the University Research Facility in Big Data Analytics (UBDA), the first university-wide research facility in big data analytics among universities in Hong Kong. Equipped with big data expertise in PolyU and the most advanced computing infrastructure and tools today, UBDA is expected to foster cross-disciplinary research collaborations in PolyU, establish a strong partnership with industries on big data analytics applications, and promote big data education in Hong Kong.
Big Data Analytics is an analytic process of a huge volume of scattered and dynamic data sets from multiple data sources to uncover hidden patterns, explore unknown correlations, and predict future events. The use of Big Data Analytics will result in better optimization of decision making, resource utilization and planning. This technology has become essential in our economy and society, and its applications have continued to grow in different areas and industries.
Dr David Chung
At the opening ceremony of UBDA, PolyU’s President Professor Timothy W. Tong said, “As a university which moves with the times and caters for the needs of society, PolyU thus pulled together our expertise in computing, applied mathematics and information technology to establish UBDA. We hope we can bring together not only colleagues from different disciplines, but also external partners in different sectors, to do some joint research.”
The Under Secretary for Innovation and Technology, Dr David Chung, said, “With the set-up of this new University Research Facility in Big Data Analytics, I believe that the researchers in The Hong Kong Polytechnic University will be able to use the facility for carrying out more forward-looking research projects that will benefit the society and supporting a vibrant big data innovation ecosystem in Hong Kong.”


