Gluon – Connecting Enterprises, Consumers And Cars With IoT, AI And Blockchain

22 Mar 2018

Gluon Solutions, Inc. is pleased to announce a partnership with Stratis Group Ltd. as one of their flagship, verified ICO’s. Gluon is a powerful platform, built by successful, experienced automotive and technology executives, entrepreneurs and advisors. Gluon connects enterprises, consumers, and vehicles using IoT devices, artificial intelligence, and blockchain technology. The platform establishes an interconnected network of vehicles where individuals and businesses can monitor, track, tune, and diagnose issues. The platform allows businesses and enterprises to run their backend operations and links them directly to consumers and vehicles.
Chris Trew
By using its own secure private blockchain based on the Stratis platform, Gluon will be utilizing it to augment and secure its immense existing platform by storing enterprise and transactional data, vehicle service records, repairs, diagnostics, and emissions date. Using a private blockchain and protocols allows for increased scalability, stability, and security compared to other platforms. Consumers and businesses are given the flexibility and security of paying with and/or receiving cryptocurrency payments in addition to traditional forms of payments. Stratis recognized that Gluon is not simply an idea, given the fact that their team already has a working product. Launched in 2014, Gluon now has a global presence with headquarters in the USA and boasts an increasing market presence.
Stratis will be offering deployment and support services to Gluon before, during and after their token sale. The Stratis ICO Platform is a secure, customizable platform designed for businesses. Their powerful BaaS platform has been developed from the ground up in C# and Microsoft .NET framework and is easily deployable within the cloud, which in turn allows Gluon to seamlessly integrate the Stratis platform into their existing infrastructure. Speaking about the latest partnership, Chris Trew, CEO and Founder of Stratis said, “Security is paramount for both our businesses and we knew we would be well-aligned to work together, pushing both our organizations into the future-sphere.”


