Scala’s Intelligent Visual And Consumer Engagement Solutions On Display At DSE 2018

28 Mar 2018

The Booth Features Innovations from the STRATACACHE Family and Top Scala Partners
Scala will feature consumer engagement solutions from the STRATACACHE family of digital media/marketing technology companies at Digital Signage Expo 2018, displaying shopper engagement solutions that feature the intersection of intelligent visual display, consumer analytics and actionable shopper data used to impact the consumer journey. Also featured in the booth are some of Scala’s top partners from Latin America, the US and Canada, giving DSE visitors a look at the extended capabilities of the Scala platform and the expertise of the partner network, who have vast experience designing and deploying successful digital networks. Scala and its featured partners’ booths can be found in booth #2508 at DSE 2018, being held March 27-28 in Las Vegas.
“With the scale and strength of the larger STRATACACHE organization, we are way ahead of the competitive market in bringing consumer intelligence, big data, artificial intelligence and shopper insights to more than 2 billion consumer interactions a day around the globe,” said Chris Riegel, CEO of Scala and the STRATACACHE family of companies. “We are delivering real, measurable, profitable results to our customers, showing how their investment in improving consumer experiences can pay significant dividends.” Riegel added, “Additionally, we’re growing globally and are looking to have conversations at DSE with ambitious new talent who are ready to evolve their professional careers.”
Highlighted solutions in booth #2508 include:
Scala media players: These devices were designed from the ground up to work with Scala software and deliver superior performance for its class. Optimized architecture delivers high performance throughout the entire lifetime of the media player. Robust 24×7 operation ensures you are always able to deliver your visual communications.
Scala content accelerator: New Scala-branded multimedia caching devices ensure reliable, timely delivery of rich media experiences and are backed by the expertise and technology of SuperLumin, a STRATACACHE company featured in a partner booth.
Consumer Insights: Analytics dashboards of the solutions running on the show floor, including session time and upsell conversions, are updating in real time using our in-house marketing analytics platform, part of last year’s Walkbase acquisition. All the insights gathered are flexible and customizable to examine your KPIs and assist with marketing and retail strategy definition.
Outdoor Digital Displays: High quality and manufactured in the USA, our outdoor digital displays have a life expectancy of 10 years and feature a modular design, allowing all components to be field serviceable in 15 minutes or less. Durable and rugged, the fixtures operate 24/7 in any environment and weather condition. The sensor-rich design gives deeper understanding of customer behavior and even predicts when something might go wrong.
Interactive Display Coolers: Display full-motion video to attract shoppers to the cooler containing the featured product. Content can include a short game which highlights and promotes the items inside the cooler, fully visible behind the transparent glass. Monetize the display content to generate ad revenue from partner brands. The Primasee coolers and freezers come in multiple sizes for flexibility in deployment in various retail store footprints.
Additional Scala booth experiences include: an automotive solution that combines audience intelligence with guided selling; a “Wellness Technology” corner which features an in-aisle assistive selling kiosk, an interactive mannequin that provides health tips and the “Scala Step Challenge” which leverages and displays fitness tracker data in real time; an altered reality audience engagement experience from STRATACACHE company enVu; a gaming lounge that lets visitors play a quick fun game on large format screens; and an interactive solution that provides shoppers with customized assistance to help navigate the product discovery process.
Scala partners’ booths, located on the perimeter of the larger Scala booth, highlight the strength of Scala’s long-standing global partner channel, demonstrating the power of the Scala platform through real-world demos and integrations across variety of verticals.


