NetDragon Chairman Lays Out Unique Vision At ICALT To Build The Largest Global Learning Community With Cutting-Edge Technologies

10 Jul 2018

NetDragon Websoft Holdings Limited (“NetDragon” or “the Company”) (Hong Kong Stock Code: 777), a global leader in building internet communities, is a key participant in the 18th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (“ICALT”), where Dejian Liu, Founder and Chairman of NetDragon and Co-Dean of Smart Learning Institute of Beijing Normal University, delivered a visionary keynote speech titled “Interaction and Engagement in Education through Technological Innovations”. In his speech, Liu elaborated with a great level of details on NetDragon’s unique vision and strategy to transform the way of learning with game-changing technologies. His speech has inspired and created tremendous resonance with an audience of academia and educators, many of whom are distinguished leaders across the education community.
ICALT, which is held from 9th to 13th of July at Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (“IIT Bombay”) in India, is an annual international conference on advanced learning technologies and technology-enhanced learning organized by IEEE Computer Society and IEEE Technical Committee on Learning Technology. Started since year 2000, ICALT is widely recognized as one of the most preeminent global education technology (“EdTech”) conferences where current and future EdTech leaders share their visions in how learning technologies will be applied to revolutionize the world of learning..
Follow Us
During his speech, Dejian Liu highlighted NetDragon’s technology know-how and prowess – that the Company now possesses one of the deepest advanced learning technology portfolios in the world that spans across artificial intelligence, big data, virtual reality, augmented reality and speech assessment. Liu also pointed out that integrated with its cutting-edge technologies is the broadest learning product portfolio in terms of use cases, covering pre-class preparation, inside-the-classroom engagement and after-class learning.  The result is the most engaging and effective learning experience that a student can ever imagine.
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
Liu went on to excite the audience by showcasing some of NetDragon’s flagship products including AI Teaching Assistant, 101 Education PPT, VR Mysticraft, Edmodo and ClassFlow.
Dr. Kinshuk, Founding Chair of IEEE Technical Committee on Learning Technologies and Dean of the College of Information at the University of North Texas, commented: “Dejian Liu has delivered a truly powerful speech. He has a pioneering vision to transform education through fusion of state-of-the-art technologies with curriculum to create highly engaging and multimedia rich learning experience. Under his leadership, NetDragon’s vision reflects exactly what education will be in future.”
Read More: How “System Mindfulness” Is Changing The FMCG Industry


