Applexus Launches Artificial Intelligence Practice To Expand Products And Services Offerings

10 Apr 2018

New practice combines the power of artificial intelligence with innovative and practical business solutions to accelerate digital transformation
Applexus Technologies, a full-service business and technology solutions company based in the Seattle area, announced the launch of a new Artificial Intelligence (AI) practice to provide AI software and services to clients. The newly launched team is part of Applexus Product and Innovation. The new practice supports a wide variety of AI services and solutions, through custom and packaged solutions, using emerging technologies such as deep learning, machine learning and big data analysis.
The Applexus AI Team
The Applexus Chief Technologist and AI practice leader is Dr. Thomas Koickal, one of the longest-serving global practitioners of machine learning based technologies. His career of more than 20 years has included work at the University of Edinburgh, UK and Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, a research center of the Indian Space Research Organization. His experience includes research, development, speaking engagements and published articles on predictive modeling, machine learning, neuromorphic systems and brain-inspired computing architectures.
Dr Koickal leads a team of data scientists and machine learning experts. They use AI and data driven insights to develop products and services for retail, fashion, consumer products and life sciences companies. “Early adopters have shown the way with AI. The rest of the business world has started to recognize the value of incorporating AI and machine learning technologies in their everyday business processes,” said Dr. Koickal. “Our team is applying technologies such as image recognition, chatbots, predictive analytics and deep learning with immediate effectiveness,” he added.
Full lifecycle of Artificial Intelligence services and solutions
“Artificial Intelligence offers incredible transformative power for enterprises,” said Sam Mathew, CEO. “Under Dr. Koickal’s leadership, Applexus’ AI practice will help companies accelerate their AI transformation initiatives. We see this as a logical extension of our commitment to ‘Innovation-as-a-Service’ (IaaS), a concept that facilitates the ideation, creation and innovation of products and services using new technologies.”
The Applexus AI team will work closely with Applexus Labs to deliver solutions and services that cover the whole range of the AI and ML ecosystem including Big Data, Predictive Analytics and IoT.


