EclecticIQ Grows Customer Base By 100 Percent, Establishes North American Headquarters And Continues Expanding To Strategic Regions

13 Mar 2018

Series-B investment unlocks additional growth of customer base in key European countries, USA, Canada, Australia and Singapore. With an optimized product portfolio for jumpstarting and advancing threat intelligence practices EclecticIQ further strengthens its position in the Cyber Threat Intelligence sector.
EclecticIQ, the global provider of Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) technology solutions and Fusion Center operator, today announced that it grew its customer base by 100 percent in 2017. This is just one indicator of why 2017 was a milestone year for EclecticIQ. Furthermore, the company has grown its staff by 150 percent and made significant recruitments for its executive team.
Dane Coyer
Additionally, the fast growth has enabled the expansion into new regions, such as the North American market, where EclecticIQ has recently opened its new regional Headquarters in Herndon, Virginia.
“Opening our North American Headquarters in Fairfax County, Virginia was the next logical step in our expansion plan,” said Dane Coyer, General Manager of EclecticIQ North America. “With a rich Cyber Security culture, deep talent pool and great infrastructure it was an easy choice. We are very excited to be a part of the community.”
EclecticIQ has further strengthened its position in European key markets, Australia and Singapore with more regions to follow.
With the funding received in a Series-B round in late 2017, EclecticIQ is now one of the best-funded cyber security scale-ups in Europe with the ambition to further expanding its technology and services offering.
Through the expansion of its offering with EclecticIQ Fusion Center, EclecticIQ provides a product for jumpstarting a CTI practice, thereby unlocking the broader market of organizations that have no dedicated threat analysts, yet.
Joep Gommers
Further updates and additions to the EclecticIQ product and service offering will be rolled out during 2018. One of the main goals this year is to further diversify the product portfolio to match the different needs of organizations that are building or expanding their CTI practice.
“2017 was a significant milestone year for EclecticIQ in which we have further strengthened our position as a leading vendor in the cyber threat intelligence sector,” said Joep Gommers, CEO and founder of EclecticIQ. “With this momentum, our goal is to offer our support and expertise in the fight against the rapidly growing threat landscape to an even wider range of customers around the globe.”


