Speakeasy AI Announces Partnership With Creative Virtual USA

05 Apr 2018

Partnership Pairs Solutions To Deliver Conversational AI In Voice Like Never Before
Speakeasy AI formally announced its partnership with Creative Virtual USA today. The partnership will allow Speakeasy AI to bring AI to voice channels by integrating Creative Virtual’s industry leading omnichannel virtual assistant solution with Speakeasy AI’s Speech-to-Intent™ voice solutions. Additionally, Creative Virtual will be able to provide Speakeasy AI’s voice AI suite in EMEA and ASIAPAC.
The combined partnership will bring to market an end-to-end omnichannel conversational customer experience for enterprises. The world’s first and only Speech-to-Intent™ solution integrated with the most proven enterprise class digital virtual assistant will deliver the promise of AI in voice and beyond.
Frank Schneider
“We have strong ties to Creative Virtual and can’t think of a more proven and agile solution and team with which to partner. Delivering Creative Virtual’s virtual assistant solution within voice channels with Speakeasy AI is a compelling combination no one in the artificial intelligence market can match,” said Frank Schneider, CEO of Speakeasy AI.
“Intelligent Automation is the single most impactful project an enterprise organization can execute on today. Combining conversational content with personalized customer data to answer questions and help consumers regardless of channel is a paradigm shift. Our partnership with Speakeasy AI ensures that voice, which continues to receive the largest share of customer contacts, delivers the same intelligent, convenient self-service experience as any other digital channel at enterprise scale,” said Mike Murphy, CEO of Creative Virtual USA.
Our mission is to make it easier for businesses to understand and respond to their customers’ needs in voice with AI. We accomplish this mission by using the world’s first and only Speech-to-Intent™ solution. Combined with our end-to-end reporting, our solution provides real-time insights into understanding customers’ intents, needs and outcomes. And since an AI platform is only as good as it’s improvement cycle, we enable rapid updates to ensure wins are delivered on the day you launch. With our voice AI solutions and our team’s proven expertise, we work tirelessly to provide better voice experiences and deliver understanding as a service.
Creative Virtual, winner of the Queen’s Awards for Enterprise: Innovation 2017, is a global leader in self-service solutions that enable anywhere, anytime customer engagement between brands and their customers. Our innovative virtual agent, knowledge management and business intelligence platform empowers organizations to provide customers with consistent, accurate, personalized and seamless omnichannel engagement across contact channels.


