CarePredict Unveiling AI-Powered Elder Care Technology Platform

25 May 2018

CarePredict Has Developed and Patented The Premier Artificial Intelligence (AI) – Powered Elder Care Technology Platform To Continuously Observe, Learn, And Trigger Just-In-Time High-Quality Care For Seniors
CarePredict is one of the first companies using artificial intelligence (AI) to help provide seniors with the care they need and deserve. CarePredict announced that they are unveiling their Next Generation AI-Powered Elder Care Technology Platform.
“We are excited to meet with leaders in the industry at the Argentum Senior Living Conference & Expo” said Satish Movva, CEO and founder of CarePredict. “By measuring the activities of daily living (ADLs) of assisted living and memory care residents, the staff and management team of senior living communities will be able to identify valuable healthcare insights and be more proactive in delivering superior care and raise resident satisfaction and drive revenues along with increased average length of stays.”
Read More: How Do You Close The Diversity Gap In Technology Companies?
With headquarters in Fort Lauderdale, FL and a growing office in Silicon Valley, the company has developed and patented the premier artificial intelligence (AI) – powered elder care technology platform to continuously observe, learn, and trigger just-in-time high-quality care for seniors. The CarePredict solution combines a Tempo wearable sensor with sophisticated machine-learning algorithms and smart location technology to measure activity and behavioral patterns of residents – enabling senior living care staff to intervene before health emergencies occur.
CarePredict’s products currently are being used by senior living communities to provide high-quality care, and to predict when residents are at risk for falls, urinary tract infections (UTIs), or are depressed. CarePredict has deployed its products in assisted living and memory care communities in the U.S. and Canada, and soon will be launching in Japan, China, Argentina and Brazil.
“Never have I seen such a comprehensive solution – AI-driven health and wellness insights, real-time location tracking, electronic lock access, wander management, staff productivity insights – and they are just getting started!” said Schon Alkire of LifeWell Senior Living, an early customer of CarePredict.
Brad Williams
“The Argentum Senior Living Executive Conference & Expo is ideal for senior living providers seeking solutions, information on new products and services, and meaningful relationships with leaders in the industry,” said Brad Williams, Argentum’s vice president of business development. The premier sponsors for the conference are Brandywine Living, Brookdale Senior Living, Direct Supply, Five Star Senior Living, Medline, National Health Investors, Silverado and Welltower.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Powerful Women In The Tech World
CarePredict is a venture-backed AI-driven digital health company with locations in Fort Lauderdale, FL & Palo Alto, CA. The company develops proprietary connected remote sensing technologies that allow caregivers to continuously observe, learn, and trigger just-in-time care for seniors in group living, home care, and aging-at-home settings. Powered by deep-machine learning, we produce actionable wellness insights based on rich data sets that currently are not available anywhere. These insights are served up on user-friendly multi-lingual dashboards to provide preventative, person-centered senior care. CarePredict products commonly are used for automated ADL assessment, prediction and prevention of senior falls, and for early detection of UTIs and depression. Products are deployed in the U.S. and Canada, and soon will be available in Japan, China, Argentina and Brazil.
Argentum is the leading national trade association serving companies that own, operate and support professionally managed senior living communities in the United States. Argentum’s Senior Living Executive Conference & Expo takes place in San Diego, CA on May 14-16, 2018. Approximately 2,700 senior living professionals and more than 300 exhibitors will be in attendance at the Expo. The Expo is an educational and informational exchange based on your need to understand products and services to help your-day-to-day needs. The Argentum Senior Living Executive Conference & Expo has been recognized among the most recent class of “Fastest 50” and “Next 50” events by Trade Show Executive (TSE) magazine for its significant expansion and continued growth.
Read More: Tech For Good Summit In Paris: All You Need To Know From Day 1


