Underwater Drone Startup Aquarobotman Launches An Exploration Robot

30 Apr 2018

Aquarobotman Is A Remote-Controlled, Camera-Equipped Underwater Drone
Aquarobotman is a remote-controlled, camera-equipped underwater drone – and it’s the most stable machine and fastest yet from the underwater robotic startup, Aquarobotman.
The drone can go far down into some of the deepest depths of the ocean, much farther than most human explorers. It can also get to 100 meters below the surface – the technical limit for humans in deep diving. That sort of quickness and precision is helpful when traversing underneath the sea.
Aquarobotman can hover over objects or change depth or direction without pitching at high or low speed. The added ability to stop exactly where you want to further explore a sunken ship (possibly with buried treasure) is a boon to underwater exploration. The underwater drone can stream live video to a monitor during explorations and the team at Aquarobotman is currently exploring VR, so people playing with the drone can feel like they are right there in the depths with their vehicle.
  Other underwater drones include;
The iBubble underwater drone was the first hands-free underwater drone to hit the market. The diving drone is designed to follow you while you’re underwater, capturing amazing and high-quality footage without any operation on your part.
Aquabotix is the technology leader in portable underwater vehicles. They claim their vehicles are faster, smarter, more capable and more affordable than other inspection/observation class ROVs. Aquabotix vehicles are simple to use yet powerful enough to accomplish complex missions. We have taken state of the art technology from above the water and transformed it for use below the surface.
BIKI is the world’s first bionic underwater drone that is also the only underwater robot featuring automated balance, obstacle avoidance, and return to base. By supporting a 4K camera, BIKI presents you with the best view from underwater. BIKI, the smallest but strongest. Through this intelligent robot fish, you can visualize the underwater world from a completely new perspective. BIKI is not only an almighty underwater drone but also a robot pet full of emotions.
Read More: Interview With Bryan Gold, Co-Founder, CEO At #Paid


