MRP Presents AI Applications For Sales And Marketing At SiriusDecisions 2018 Summit

08 May 2018

Two Case Studies Highlight Mrp’s Ai Capabilities for Insight-Driven Account-Based Marketing
MRP, a global account-based marketing platform leader, will sponsor and present at SiriusDecisions 2018 Summit May 8-10 in Las Vegas. At the summit, MRP and its clients will focus on how B2B businesses can utilize artificial intelligence for sales and marketing. MRP will also showcase its latest predictive analytics software update, Prelytix 2.1.
“MRP understands that B2B organizations must explore how they can update and scale their sales and marketing approaches to stay competitive, and AI is a powerful way to do that,” said Kevin Cunningham, CEO of MRP. “We’re excited to exhibit our latest AI-powered sales and marketing offerings and capabilities at SiriusDecisions 2018 Summit.”
As part of the summit, two MRP clients will present case studies. On May 8, MRP’s first participating client will share with attendees how MRP and its AI-embedded software has helped the organization scale demand generation globally. The case study will focus on how account-based marketing driven by the streaming insights derived from predictive analytics can target relevant accounts, provide better visibility into demand units and drive greater return on investment for sales and marketing.
Also on May 8, MRP’s second participating client will discuss how it was able to streamline its marketing strategies thanks to MRP. The client will share how predictive analytics helped align their investments and workflows around the always-on account-based insights from MRP Prelytix. MRP is at SiriusDecisions 2018 Summit at booth #107.
MRP provides predictive customer acquisition software and services. For 15 years, clients have relied on MRP to help them achieve their revenue goals by combining cutting-edge predictive analytics with a full suite of account-based marketing services to acquire new customers, faster.
Kx is a division of FD, a global technology provider with 20 years of experience working with some of the world’s largest finance, technology, retail, pharma, manufacturing and energy institutions. Kx technology is a leader in high-performance, in-memory computing, streaming analytics and operational intelligence.


