CSI’s Virtual Observer Integrates WFO For Talkdesk Environments

29 Jun 2018

Coordinated Systems, Inc. (CSI) has joined the Talkdesk AppConnect Marketplace. This partnership enables quality management, screen capture and robust Workforce Optimization options for Talkdesk customers.
WFO-enable your Talkdesk cloud contact center experience now!
This integration combines the best-of-breed cloud-based contact center services and workforce optimization (WFO) applications of Talkdesk and the CSI Virtual Observer WFO platform. Together, this partnership further enables Talkdesk and CSI to deliver an integrated and robust overall contact center solution to new and existing customers.
Follow Us
CSI’s flagship product, Virtual Observer (VO), is a workforce optimization solution specifically designed for the cloud-enabled, modern contact center. VO extends the Talkdesk platform to offer integrated Omnichannel Recording, Quality Management with Screen Capture, and industry leading pre-built connectors to embed WFO within CRM applications such as Salesforce, Oracle Service Cloud, Zendesk and ServiceNow. Contact centers are becoming more CRM-centric, with CRM becoming their preferred workspace. With a single sign-on functionality, Virtual Observer provides WFO capabilities directly within the CRM environment. The Quality Management suite includes screen capture which, along with integrated audio recordings, gives a complete live view of agents’ customer interactions. These components working together offer superior visibility into contact center operational performance and customer intelligence.
Read More: Mensia Technologies Raises 1.3 Million Euro To Introduce Koala Neurofeedback In Europe
Rich Marcia
“We are extremely excited about entering into this partnership with Talkdesk and becoming an essential component in their contact center ecosystem,” said Rich Marcia, Marketing Director for CSI.
Talkdesk with Virtual Observer benefits multiple employee roles within the contact center. Supervisors and Managers can save time and redistribute effort through automation. The integrated solution also assists QA staff and workforce management specialists in optimizing their everyday workload.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
The integrated VO – Talkdesk platform is seamless in operation and functions as a unified, robust enterprise contact center solution to end customers. A WFO-enabled cloud contact center platform such as Talkdesk with Virtual Observer is an essential requirement within a contact center customer journey. The combination of the entire available integrated WFO feature set makes Talkdesk a top-tier option in the enterprise cloud contact center space.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications


