VRstudios Announces VRcade PowerPlay

14 Mar 2018

Next-Generation, Competitive eSport for Location-Based Entertainment Operators
VRstudios®, the leading provider of commercial, large-scale, free-roaming, multiplayer virtual reality (VR) solutions for Location-Based Entertainment (LBE) businesses, announced today VRcade PowerPlay™, its flagship, next-generation, competitive eSport built specifically for LBE Arenas. VRcade PowerPlay is an intensely athletic team eSport played in free-roaming, arena-scale virtual reality. Exclusive to VRcade PowerPlay, the competitive matches can be dynamically configured with millions of distinct combinations of multiplayer game modes, arm cannon presets, and battlefield configurations.
VRstudios announces the next generation of eSports
VRcade PowerPlay enables unrestricted physical action across the entire arena playing field and encourages the eAthletes to play smart, incorporating competitive strategies and teamwork. Spectators are also engaged and entertained by the live action along with local and cloud-streamed in-game broadcasts.
Kevin Vitale
“Everyone recognizes that eSports are increasingly popular and we believe that the release of VRcade PowerPlay is literally a ‘game-changer.’ It’s the next generation of eSports that adds true athletic activity over a large format playing field, and it can be deployed by any LBE operator,” said Kevin Vitale, VRstudios’ CEO. “While complementary to our other systems and attractions, VRcade PowerPlay creates a whole new category of location-based VR entertainment for both players and spectators. It also opens the door to a number of new business models and branding options going forward for LBE operators and sponsors.”
VRcade PowerPlay is designed to be played by 2-8 eAthletes moving unrestricted on a 60’x40’ configurable VRcade PowerPlay Battlefield. VRcade PowerPlay is managed by VRcade AMP, the attraction management platform purpose-built for LBE operators. It runs on the commercial VRcade Arena system which requires no additional physical infrastructure or props. The combination of VRcade PowerPlay, AMP and Arenas create a turnkey solution for LBE operators to quickly add “Sport of the Future” VR attractions to their facilities.
Chanel Summers
“First and foremost, we wanted to deliver an exciting, action-packed game that grew out of the vision from the original founding team over 5 years ago,” said Chanel Summers, VRstudios’ Vice President of Creative Development. “It combines a retro game aesthetic with a futuristic battlefield setting to showcase a truly physical sport in a nearly unlimited virtual arena. By design, the eAthletes quickly forget that they are in a virtual experience and move naturally in all the same ways that they would on a real-world playing field, including running, ducking, and jumping to beat the competition. The physical action, range of motion and dynamic competitive match formats definitely qualify VRcade PowerPlay as the sport of the future.”
 


