Robin8 Profile Utility Token (PUT) Appoints Artur Petrovych As Blockchain CTO

07 Mar 2018

Next Generation decentralized search engine and social media platform on Blockchain will build Blockchain team in Ukraine and New York
Robin8, a new wave of social media on Blockchain, has announced the appointment of a new blockchain CTO.
Ukrainian executive Artur Petrovych has over 15 years of leadership experience in software development and hosting provider companies. He has led teams of 55+ specialists, managed multiple projects simultaneously and supervised more than half a dozen technical departments.
Miranda Tan
“Artur has a proven record of directing teams in the digital economy and is also highly experienced in launching new ventures as well as expanding existing projects in the Blockchain technology industry,” says Miranda Tan, Robin8 CEO. “Robin8 meanwhile has developed a strategy to build parallel blockchain teams based in Kiev and New York, and we will shortly launch a proof of concept for our profiling data management by the close of Q1 in 2018.”
“I am excited to join Robin8, an amazing team of industry experts to build the next generation social media platform on the Blockchain,” says Artur Petrovych. “The Robin8 Blockchain team will be in Ukraine and New York to start. We have already started working on our proof of concept for the Robin8 Profile Utility Token that we plan to share with the community in the next 4-6 weeks.”
Robin8 launched its profile utility token (PUT) with a successful Initial Coin Offering in January 2018.  The offering was completed in less than 1 minute.  Founded in 2015, Robin8 is a decentralized search engine and content marketing platform powered by big data and Artificial Intelligence (AI) that provides consumer insights and analysis in the fast-growing Chinese social media ecosystem. Robin8’s proprietary recommendation engine allows marketers to find the best influencers and take control of and monetize their behavior online.
 


