HIMSS Analytics Introduces LOGIC Predict In Health IT Market Intelligence Platform

23 Mar 2018

Identifies and Scores Sales Prospects on Propensity to Purchase Health IT Solutions Using Artificial Intelligence
HIMSS Analytics today announced the expansion of the LOGIC™ health IT market intelligence platform to include Predict, a new solution to help sales and marketing teams understand their clients’ propensity to purchase health IT solutions. LOGIC Predict uses proprietary algorithms and data-driven methodology to support health IT vendors in their efforts to identify new sales opportunities, and better service and retain existing clients.
LOGIC Predict combines data from the HIMSS ecosystem with a health IT vendors’ CRM to score specific sales prospects on a 0- to 5-star ranking scale, with 5-star accounts exhibiting signals that represent the highest likelihood to purchase technology solutions. Leveraging the robust data found within the full LOGIC market intelligence platform, Predict users gain deep insight on health systems and their historic, current and future technology purchase plans. Built in ROI tracking gives sales teams the ability to determine which opportunities ultimately convert and close.
Blain Newton
“LOGIC Predict is a powerful tool that provides valuable insights to guide sales and marketing activities,” said Blain Newton, Executive Vice President, HIMSS Analytics. “Predict helps health IT vendors uncover which organizations are most likely to buy their products and services.  Additionally, using AI-enabled lead scoring we can better understand which opportunities are unlikely to materialize, so sales teams can focus their efforts to maximize impact. Predict helps vendors to get, grow and keep clients.”
“We engaged with Predict to focus on increasing lift for a new offering we brought to market,” said Justin Campbell, vice president, strategy & marketing, Galen Healthcare Solutions.  “Opportunities were scored on a weekly basis, allowing our sales team to focus their efforts on those more likely to close. The results were compelling, as we added a large number of leads to our queue and closed our first two deals for the new offering. Predict has been instrumental in improving our sales forecasting and navigating our team to true client need, where our solutions pair to address.”
HIMSS Analytics is a global healthcare IT market intelligence, research and standards organization assisting clientele in both healthcare delivery and healthcare technology solutions business development to make lasting improvements in efficiency and performance.


