Apttus Intelligent Middle Office Platform On IBM Cloud Unveiled

15 May 2018

Apttus Intelligent Middle Office Platform on IBM Cloud will fortify the company’s current suite of quote-to-cash, contract management applications. As a leading provider of Middle Office platform, Apptus is bringing an unprecedented power, flexibility, and innovation with the Apttus Intelligent Middle Office Platform.
Apttus’ Innovations Include Max, the Company’s Applied Artificial Intelligence
Apttus is powered by the Apttus Intelligent Cloud, a hybrid-cloud platform utilizing the most advanced technologies from Salesforce, Microsoft, and IBM. Apttus’ innovations include Max, the company’s Applied Artificial Intelligence that enables enterprises to achieve superior business outcomes.
With Apttus’ industry-leading Middle Office solutions and the global reach and scale of IBM Cloud, the two companies are helping businesses transform their global revenue operations. Today’s development follows the announcement earlier this year of IBM’s investment in Apttus to jointly develop AI solutions involving IBM Watson and Apttus’ applied AI, Max.
 Recommended Read: B2B Buying Disconnect: Are You Targeting the Right Set of Customers?
Customers will be able to run innovative Quote-to-Cash solutions on the IBM Cloud, including —
Apttus Max: Leverage applied AI that provides a conversational experience and real-time intelligent recommendations to create winning quotes, configure optimized products and solutions, update and create smart contracts, manage discounting, and pricing to boost margins, retrieve data, and perform other Quote-to-Cash and contract management functions.
Configure Price Quote (CPQ): Close bigger deals faster with visibility into the latest product and pricing information, and the ability to quote quickly. Utilizing built-in analytics and intuitive workflows, salespeople, and partners can discount smarter, outduel competition, and be easier to do business with.
Contract Lifecycle Management (CLM): Bring visibility and control to the contract management process without standing in the way of revenue. Accelerate contract lifecycles and keep sales teams ahead of the competition with centralized Legal playbooks and audit trails to stay 100 percent compliant.
Impact on Revenue Generation and the Management of Commercial Relationships
Apttus’ Intelligent Middle Office Platform allows enterprises to automate, optimize and apply artificial intelligence to their most important business processes – revenue generation and the management of commercial relationships. Unlike other application platforms, Apttus’ Intelligent Middle Office Platform provides customers with the ability to run Apttus applications on multiple clouds, including IBM Cloud.
Apttus solutions will be demonstrable on IBM Cloud at Accelerate. Customer deployment timelines will depend on specific customer requirements.
At the time of this announcement,  Kirk Krappe, CEO of Apttus, said, “Apttus pioneered the Intelligent Middle Office space to maximize the value of every solution that sits between CRM and ERP systems.”
Kirk added, “By bringing these offerings to the IBM Cloud, we’re expanding the opportunity for more and more enterprises to resolve their longstanding challenges and transform their business. It’s our goal to help every IBM Cloud user run their revenue operations smarter, faster and better.”
Mac Devine, IBM Fellow and vice president, IBM Watson and Cloud, said, “Cloud is becoming a gateway for enterprises to leverage high-value services like AI to generate new business value.”
Mac added, “With the Apttus Intelligent Middle Office platform on IBM Cloud, enterprises will be able to bring AI capabilities to core business processes and benefit from IBM Cloud’s global reach and security-rich environment.”
Currently, Apttus is a leading provider of the Intelligent Middle Office platform allowing enterprises to automate and optimize their most critical revenue and commercial relationship management processes. Apttus partners with a world-class ecosystem. Apttus customers include hundreds of the world’s mid-sized organizations and the who’s who of the Global 1000.


