Latest AI Social Robot ‘Musio’ Reaches Berlin

30 Aug 2017

AKA LLC, the developer of the world’s first artificially intelligent social robot ‘Musio’, will officially introduce Musio on coming Sept. 7 in Berlin. The event will bring together journalists in Berlin, to present live demo and keynotes on Musio’s latest features and capabilities.
Official image of Musio, developed by AKA LLC
Based on AKA’s AI engine ‘MUSE’, Musio is a communication robot capable of interacting socially with people of all ages. Assisted with NLP (Natural Language Processing), Vision, and AKA’s rich interactive content ecosystem, Musio aims to address the world’s growing demand for a robot companion.
“AKA’s next step is with Europe’s traditional hardware companies seeking innovation,” said Raymond Jung, CEO of AKA LLC. “By presenting Musio the robot, AKA is introducing its core technology, MUSE, to our future partners. We believe that our AI engine will present immeasurable opportunity to those calling out for ‘AI Plus’ for the upcoming industrial revolution.”
Launched in Japan this April with SoftBank C&S as the official retail partner, Musio is now a No.1 bestselling social robot in Japan. The driving force behind is the English conversation feature configured through MUSE’s context-aware deep-learning algorithm.
Another key factor is Musio’s design element: Already noted in Japan as being incomparable in the industry, Musio further proved its design competitiveness by being displayed in an ongoing international robot exhibition (Hello Robot – Design between Human and Machine) in Europe.
Japan’s middle and high schools, top education companies, as well as global firms seeking employee education have acknowledged social robot Musio as their next English solution. Currently, AKA has reached an agreement with Japan’sregional education committee on deploying mass Musio units across primary and secondary schools in the region, and is now preparing for an official announcement. Moreover, Japan’s major senior welfare centers as well as health care centers are collaborating with AKA on using Musio to help prevent Alzheimer’s disease.
Leveraging this momentum, AKA’s goal is to bring its AI technology to Europe’s industrial sphere ranging from automobiles to consumer electronics and appliances, starting from Berlin and across Europe.


