Lantronix To Participate In Ingram Micro Cloud Summit

24 Apr 2018

Lantronix, Inc. Is A Global Provider Of Secure Data Access And Management Solutions For Internet of Things (IoT) assets; VP of Marketing to Present on IoT Panel
Lantronix, Inc. a global provider of secure data access and management solutions for the industrial Internet of Things (IoT), today announced that it is participating and showcasing its portfolio of IoT and IT management solutions at the Ingram Micro Cloud Summit in Boca Raton, Florida from April 30 to May 2, 2018. Lantronix vice president of marketing, Shahram Mehraban, will also be participating in an IoT panel discussion with IBM, Microsoft and Verizon, moderated by Ben Xiang, Ingram Micro’s Global head of IoT.
Lantronix has been delivering robust connectivity and management solutions for the distributed IT infrastructure, data center, cloud, and IoT market for more than 25 years. Lantronix’s IoT solutions include the SGX 5150 external IoT device gateway, xPico® 200 series of embedded IoT gateways, and the MACH10® Global Device Manager which provide secure, robust connectivity and device management for machines in a wide range of verticals from industrial to retail to medical and transportation. Lantronix’s IT management solutions include the industry’s first modular console manager, the SLC 8000 advanced console manager that provides out-of-band remote management capability for data center and cloud infrastructure ensuring highest network availability and uptime needed for mission critical IoT and IT applications.
Shahram Mehraban
“Today, more and more companies are looking to create new business models with the Internet of Things and using the power of cloud to do so quickly and securely,” said Shahram Mehraban, Lantronix vice president of marketing. “Lantronix IoT device gateways and our new IoT software platform make it easy for OEMs, system integrators, VARs and their customers to accelerate their IoT product development and deployments. We’re excited to be partnered with Ingram Micro, a respected global technology company, to promote our solutions that help achieve this objective.”
“We are excited about our partnership with Lantronix, an IoT veteran of more than 25 years,” said Ben Xiang, Ingram Micro global head of IoT. “Lantronix’s embedded and external gateways, the MACH10 IoT platform, and their IT management solutions provide end-to-end connectivity and management solutions that are critical components on any IoT deployment.”
Lantronix, Inc. is a global provider of secure data access and management solutions for Internet of Things (IoT) assets. Our mission is to be the leading supplier of IoT solutions that enable companies to dramatically simplify the creation, deployment, and management of IoT projects while providing secure access to data for applications and people.
With more than two decades of experience in creating robust machine to machine (M2M) technologies, Lantronix is an innovator in enabling our customers to build new business models and realize the possibilities of the Internet of Things. Our connectivity solutions are deployed inside millions of machines serving a wide range of industries, including industrial, medical, security, transportation, retail, financial, environmental and government.
Lantronix is headquartered in Irvine, California.


