Delicia Eliminating Food Wastage With Blockchain Tech And AI

04 May 2018

Delicia is going to develop a first-of-its-kind Blockchain powered global food network to put an end to the wastage of food. Apart from minimizing the wastage, Delicia will also curtail food prices and make food more accessible.
Delicia is a one-of-its-kind global decentralized food network unifying retailers and consumers over an extensive geographical location to lower wastage of packed food.
Our Vision
Nixing the wastage of food items by its better utilization is the primary vision of building a Blockchain powered hypermarket, Delicia. Our platform establishes retailers have access to potential buyers, those who are looking to shop for products nearing its expiry date label at lower prices.
The Technology of Delicia
Delicia is a Blockchain-based virtual marketplace, which assures a safe & efficient place to shop daily needs stuff, for both food-related businesses and consumers. The Blockchain technology first emerged to the blocks, underpinning the World’s first Cryptocurrency, Bitcoin in the year 2009. It is a digital ledger that stores data which is kept on each computer in the network, rather than any trusted third party. The entry once made into this public ledger cannot be edited or deleted.
The Menace of Food Wastage
Well, overcooking and overbuying are the two leading cause of food wastage, but, the confusion around date labels is another factor that contributes to tons of waste worldwide. In the United States alone 40% of the packed food items are toss into the bin uneaten. Most of the people nowadays see the “best before” or the “use by date” label as the indication mark that the foster that to throw the product well before the date of expiry.
What We Aim For-
The Delicia platform is a decentralized food chain that redefines how the restaurants and sellers maximize food utilization and lower wastage. Our system is today one-and-only in the market that offers real-time search for food in excess quantity at restaurants, food items with approaching the date of expiry at discounted prices. The Delicia App offers great convenience to customers to shop for daily necessity items anytime & anywhere. The payments are made with DFT tokens.
Seller Ratings
Delicia presents its buyer with the exclusive feature of rating their experience with a particular retailer. These in turn foster retailers registered on our network to be on their edge when it comes to quality and pricing.
Real-Time Notifications
With Delicia, we have integrated the additional feature of providing real-time notifications to the buyers about the latest deals & discounts published by sellers in their geo-locations. So, you won’t miss out an amazing offer. Plus, for the sellers, they can publish sales campaigns to boost their bottom line; these may include happy hours, coupon codes, and other ways to promote their business.
Low Transactions Fees
Compared to online hyper local markets the Delicia, you will be charged a lower transaction fee compared to the traditional payment gateways. So, we won’t be an added burden on your business, eating away your annual profits.


