HP And DiSTI Join Forces To Reinvent Enterprise Training Using Virtual Reality

18 May 2018

Global alliance combines HP’s powerful VR solutions with DiSTI’s advanced development platform
International Training & Education Conference – To address the growing demand for high-impact, cost-effective virtual reality (VR) training, HP Inc. today announced an alliance with the DiSTI Corporation, a leading global provider of VR and advanced human machine interface development solutions. The companies will work together to develop unique VR training solutions for enterprise customers, with a specific focus on maintenance and operations training for complex systems such as vehicle, aircraft and industrial equipment.
VR has become an effective training tool across many industries and is expected to grow to an $18 billion market by 20221. VR developers can create and interact with complex simulations, a form of participatory learning that’s more effective than traditional training programs. With HP’s Z VR Backpack, the most powerful wearable PC VR ever created, training becomes more seamless and realistic with an untethered VR experience. VR training has also been shown to positively impact employee recruiting and retention2 for enterprise customers.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive
Xavier Garcia
“HP is enabling companies to leverage VR technology in ways that transform workflows and unleash innovation. By working with leading partners like DiSTI, we will reinvent the way workers across a range of sectors do their jobs, whether it’s operating the most advanced industrial equipment or designing and servicing the next generation of automobiles,” said Xavier Garcia, vice president and general manager, HP Z Workstations, HP Inc. “HP’s versatile and high-powered devices, combined with DiSTI’s VE Studio development platform, will empower customers to create cost-effective VR training solutions that safely replicate real-world environments and processes in rich detail.”
Starting today, HP and DiSTI will offer end-to-end enterprise virtual training solutions3 – from development to deployment – based on HP’s VR-ready hardware and DiSTI’s VE Studio® Development Platform. Customers can use the VE Studio suite to develop their own virtual training applications or have DiSTI and HP professional services teams assist in designing and building their solutions. HP’s comprehensive hardware portfolio features HP Z Desktop Workstations, including the most powerful workstations on the planet4 – the HP Z8 Workstation; the HP ZBook 17 Mobile Workstation, and the HP Z VR Backpack, the world’s first professional wearable VR PC5. VE Studio® enables rapid and cost-effective development and creates accurate hands-on experiences while HP hardware seamlessly delivers them via fast processing power and high-fidelity graphics.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World
John Cunningham
“There is tremendous market demand for enterprise-level virtual training solutions that can be rapidly implemented, are cost effective and can be developed and managed by internal staff,” said John Cunningham, Chief Revenue Officer of DiSTI.  “Many companies have identified the need to implement VR enabled training but struggle with how to get started and scale due to the lack of internal expertise and the availability of cost-effective solutions. We are excited to combine our two companies’ VR expertise to accelerate industry adoption of VR Training.”
For over 20 years, DiSTI has been providing 3D virtual training solutions to companies such as Boeing, Lockheed Martin and Nissan Motors, and developed a patented and proven database-driven development platform called VE Studio which dramatically reduces the time and cost of developing 3D training solutions and allows for reuse of content for delivery to desktop, mobile and virtual reality devices. By integrating VE Studio with HP’s VR-ready products the companies can offer enterprise customers a cost-effective end-to-end training solution.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group


