Vecna Robotics Partners With RightHand Robotics To Streamline Intralogistics And Material Handling Process

03 Apr 2018

Companies will showcase collaborative solutions at MODEX 2018
Vecna Robotics, a leader in next-generation mobile robotics, and RightHand Robotics, a leader in robotic picking solutions, announced today a collaboration that will improve the performance of e-commerce order fulfillment. Together, the companies can offer best-in-class solutions to simplify intralogistics and material handling challenges.
John Hayes
“We’re excited to have this robust and cost-effective solution become available to all Vecna Robotics and RightHand Robotics customers through this collaboration,” said John Hayes, Vice President of Sales and Marketing of Vecna Robotics. “RightHand has best-in-class piece-picking technology, while Vecna Robotics has best-in-class autonomous mobility. Both companies have a shared vision of using their expertise and cutting-edge technology to provide end-to-end, dynamic material handling and logistics solutions that can grow and evolve with business needs.”
Vecna Robotics offers a wide range of intelligent, collaborative mobile robots and fully-autonomous, zero-infrastructure AGVs designed specifically for safe and flexible material flows in dynamic, human-centric environments. Robot payload capacities range from 20kg on the low-cost RC20 conveyor robot to 4500kg on the RT4500 robotic tugger. This smart fleet works together seamlessly through central orchestration by the Core Task Manager, which takes upstream work orders and assigns tasks to robots and humans as appropriate to robustly and efficiently fulfill orders.
Leif Jentoft
“Vecna Robotics has a broad and proven range of mobile robotic solutions,” said Leif Jentoft, co-founder of RightHand Robotics. “Combined with our ability to deliver the 3Rs of robotic piece-picking – range of products, rate, and reliability – with our RightPick.AI software, we believe there are many retailers who will benefit from this holistic approach.”
RightPick is a combined hardware and software solution that handles the key task of picking individual items for e-commerce order fulfillment. With RightPick, businesses can reduce costs and improve reliability of the fulfillment process for pharmaceuticals, electronics, grocery, apparel, and many other industries. Unlike traditional factory robots, RightPick handles thousands of different items using a machine learning backend coupled with an intelligent gripper that works in concert with industry-leading robotic arms.


