Ternio Announces Appointment Of 7 Leading Industry Experts To Board Of Advisors

20 Feb 2018

Advisors Were Chosen To Help Ternio Capitalize On The Rapidly Emerging Opportunity Of Leveraging Blockchain To Bring Transparency To The Programmatic Digital Advertising Market
Ternio, the first company to provide a scalable blockchain solution for programmatic digital advertising, announced today that seven new executives have joined the company’s board of advisors. With a wealth of knowledge in blockchain protocols, advertising technology, economics and online media, the new advisors were chosen to help Ternio capitalize on the rapidly emerging opportunity of leveraging blockchain to bring transparency to the programmatic digital advertising market.
The new advisors are:
Jory Des Jardin
Jory Des Jardins – Former founder of BlogHer (acquired by SheKnows Media). Current growth advisor, operator, and board member at SheWorx
Mary Keane-Dawson – Former UK MD at Neo@Ogilvy. Founder and CEO of TRUTH agency
Patrik Sundberg – Former VP, Goldman Sachs. Responsible for building the first agricultural trading desk.
Antti Pasila
Antti Pasila – Founder and CEO at Kiosked
Denise Laussade – Former Chairman of the Board of Directors for U.S. AFP. Director of Treasury at Perdue.
Didier Martin – Former CTO and security consultant.  Lead architect at InterBlockchain.io
Jared Polites – Former FBI analyst and current Head of Marketing at Crypto Media Group.
Ian Kane
“Our advisors bring a diverse range of expertise and perspectives to Ternio’s business. While they come from different backgrounds, they all share the trait of having exceptional knowledge and reputations that put them at the top of their field,” said Ian Kane, co-founder of Ternio. “Through the knowledge and talents of these seven experts, we’ve gained the ability to learn valuable lessons from their successes and challenges, and we’ve strengthened our ability to lead the way in bringing transparency to the digital advertising landscape.”
“It’s clear that ad tech is in desperate need of a blockchain solution to solve some of the major issues around fraud and transparency,” said Antti Pasila, CEO of Kiosked and member of Ternio’s board of advisors. “Ternio is the first solution I’ve come across where the team truly understands the nuances of ad tech and where the objectives are clear. Ternio’s unique offering positions it as the leader in addressing the scaling challenges of blockchain in digital advertising.”
“Ternio is uniquely positioned to bring much-needed transparency to the digital advertising ecosystem with their blockchain system,” said Jared Polites, Head of Marketing at Crypto Media Group and member of Ternio’s board of advisors. “Advertisers will now benefit from knowing where their ad dollars are spent and how that spend can translate into better results.”
Ternio is a blockchain based digital advertising company that brings transparency to the digital advertising ecosystem through a verifiable and decentralized asset which ensures contract terms are met.  Ternio’s utility token (TERN) is used by advertisers, publishers, and ad tech companies to verify users, instantly pay publishers, and protect advertisers from ad fraud.
Read More: Interview With Peter Cahill, CEO, Voysis


