Concord Contract Management Platform Now Available On The Salesforce AppExchange, The World’s Leading Enterprise Apps Marketplace

16 Jul 2018

Concord customers now benefit from accelerated time-to-revenue through streamlined contract management, negotiation and signature
Concord, a leading contract lifecycle management platform, today announced it has launched Concord on the Salesforce AppExchange, empowering businesses to connect with their customers, partners and employees in entirely new ways. The Concord platform creates a single, automated, collaborative and digital environment where contracts are managed as a key business process, enabling companies to improve the time to revenue, efficiency, scale and internal policy compliance of sales contracts.
Concord launches on the Salesforce AppExchange, empowering businesses to connect with their customers, partners and employees in entirely new ways
As organizations scale, contracts are often one of the first things that begin to lag. This can impact sales velocity as the time between proposal and signing begins to steadily increase. Concord helps eliminate slowdowns and bottlenecks in the sales and contract negotiation cycle. It provides easy access to standard contract templates, redlining within the platform, real-time conversation and editing, approvals and e-signatures. With all parties and documents in a central, collaborative digital location, the traditional frictions surrounding contract negotiation are eliminated and time to revenue is accelerated.
Follow Us
Matt Lhoumeau
  Mike Wolff
Concord CEO Matt Lhoumeau commented, “Until now, the process behind sales contracts has been fragmented, and often manual. Concord transforms the business processes of contract management, negotiation and signature into an automated, simple, secure, single and collaborative digital environment. The availability of Concord on Salesforce AppExchange is a huge advantage for customers in terms of improving their pipeline management, negotiation process and time to revenue.” 
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
“We are happy to welcome Concord onto the AppExchange, as they provide customers with an exciting new way to reduce the time between contract proposal and contract closing,” said Mike Wolff, SVP, ISV Sales, Salesforce. “The exponential growth of the AppExchange underscores the enormous opportunity the entire Salesforce ecosystem has in creating cutting-edge solutions and driving customer success.”
Read More: The Three Biggest Industries Who Can Utilize A Language Translation Device


