Oracle HCM Cloud Delivers Simple And Powerful Innovations That Can Make Work More Enjoyable And Supportive For Employees

21 Mar 2018

New AI capabilities and user experience enhancements deliver a more personal, productive, and rewarding employee experience
ORACLE HCM WORLD — To empower HR professionals and further enhance the employee experience, Oracle announced new artificial intelligence-based capabilities and user experience enhancements within Oracle Human Capital Management (HCM) Cloud. The latest innovations deliver simple, powerful tools that can improve engagement, recruitment, and HR productivity, while also empowering employees to quickly and easily access the information they need to excel at work.
“HR teams have traditionally had to pick between simplicity and performance when selecting new technologies,” said Holger Muller, VP and Principal Analyst, Constellation Research. “To accelerate innovation, improve productivity, and successfully prepare for the future of work, HR can no longer make this trade-off. Instead, HR teams need simple and powerful solutions that combine an intuitive user experience with the latest innovations in areas such as chatbots and artificial intelligence.”
HR professionals need to apply new strategies and technologies to attract, engage, and retain employees to address escalating recruitment costs and increasing employee turnover. The latest innovations within Oracle HCM Cloud enable HR professionals to address these challenges by providing simple, powerful solutions that can proactively anticipate and respond to changing employee and workforce needs. The new innovations can optimize talent management, provide complete workforce insights, increase operational efficiency, and make it easy for everyone to connect, collaborate, and do their job – from anywhere, on any device.
Larry Freed
“We are always looking at new ways to enhance the employee experience and optimize business processes, and Oracle has been a key partner in helping us make that possible,” said Larry Freed, CIO, Overhead Door Corporation. “The new AI and user experience enhancements within Oracle HCM Cloud are powerful innovations that will greatly benefit our employees.”
With the new features, HR professionals can simplify and humanize the entire candidate and employee experience by making work more enjoyable, smarter, and collaborative.
Make Work Enjoyable: A redesigned user interface leverages artificial intelligence to help employees minimize busywork and focus on actions and decisions that matter most. The new features include:
“Newsfeed” Interface: Employees can now choose a “newsfeed” style interface to highlight the data and details they care about most. For example, tasks that need attention can be highlighted in an easy-to-read tiled format; an automatically updating analytics snapshot can elevate key business insights; and company and employee-related news can be easily accessed without digging through email.
Seamless Search: Intelligent, intuitive, new search capabilities make it easier for employees to find the information they are seeking quickly and easily.
One Experience, Any Device: A personalized cross-device experience enables employees to be more productive and take action based on company updates, personal feedback, and goals – no matter where the job takes them – on their desktop, tablet, or mobile phone.
Continuous Performance Management: New performance “check-in” capabilities help ensure employees are always receiving real-time coaching and feedback and can easily track goals.
Make Work Smarter: Powerful, built-in AI capabilities and guided paths create a simple and personalized experience from a candidate’s first interaction, through to hiring and onboarding. The new features include:
Candidate Recruiting: New AI and chatbot capabilities enable candidates to search for jobs and get questions answered directly through channels like Facebook Messenger, while also automatically alerting candidates to updates and needed actions on their channel of choice.
Optimized Promotion Process: A “self-driving” promotion process helps employees reach their objectives and succeed in their current positions by providing proactive alerts.
Hiring and Onboarding the Right Employees: Advanced machine learning capabilities help reduce the time it takes to fill open positions by highlighting best-fit candidates and proactively identifying candidates and employees who should be invited to apply.
Smart Onboarding: New onboarding features enhance collaboration between new hire, manager, and HR team to make it faster and easier for employees to move from “new hire” to an engaged, productive contributor to the team.
Make Work Supportive: New smart and adaptable AI-powered business processes enable HR professionals to deliver all the support employees need to excel. The new features include:
HR Help Desk in the Cloud: Helps ensure compliance by optimizing the management and security of sensitive Employee Relations cases with configurable actions, such as managing data collection by category and queue. Extended knowledge management capabilities ensure consistent search and content based on security and versioning.
Advanced HCM Controls: A pre-built library of best practice controls, security dashboards and workbench capabilities help organizations stop unauthorized access to sensitive HCM functions and data. With the ability to also manage exception and policy violations, HR departments can keep classified employee data protected, while lowering compliance costs (GDPR, SOX etc.), by automating audit procedures and analysis.
Chris Leone
“We all now expect that enterprise applications offer the same easy, intuitive experience that we enjoy with digital services in our personal lives,” said Chris Leone, senior vice president, HCM Development, Oracle. “With the latest release of Oracle HCM Cloud, we are focused on delivering the best possible employee experience without compromising the security or performance of critical business applications. By leveraging advanced technologies to make HR applications powerful yet simple to use on any device, we can make work smarter, more enjoyable, and more supportive.”


