Widen 2018 Connectivity Report Finds AI Key To Modern Marketing Organizations

18 May 2018

Widen 2018 Connectivity Report Finds That Marketers Are Making Far-Reaching Decisions About Artificial Intelligence with Limited Understanding of the Technology 
Widen, a leading global provider of Digital Asset Management (DAM) software, has released its second annual Connectivity Report. The Widen 2018 Connectivity Report explores how modern marketing organizations balance the power of technology with the familiarity of the human touch, and the role of connectivity in marketing operations, strategy, and business results. Widen’s team conducted and analyzed 32 phone interviews and 506 online surveys to generate the data.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
Among many findings in the Widen 2018 Connectivity Report, the company discovered a significant gap between interest in artificial intelligence (AI) and understanding of that technology in marketing departments.
The 2018 Connectivity Report found that 86 percent of respondents are not using AI in marketing and creative work, yet, according to a Gallup survey, almost 85 percent of consumers already use AI tools in their personal lives. Thus, the hype for AI hasn’t translated into practical usage in marketing departments.
Interestingly, participants gave inconsistent responses about the definitions of AI and machine learning and the differences between them.
AI Remains a Sci-Fi Topic for Most Marketers!
The Widen 2018 Connectivity Report stated, “When asked what artificial intelligence means, over 50 percent of our interview participants said it either reminded them of futuristic movies and robots or that they didn’t know. People had a much better grasp on machine learning. The struggle to distinguish AI means marketers are making far-reaching decisions about concepts they don’t necessarily understand.”
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World
The Report also covers questions about customer experience, artificial intelligence (AI), personalization, data analytics, and digital transformation. Key findings include–
76 percent of survey respondents are integrating at least two of their digital work tools.
The #1 trend among survey respondents is “personalizing the customer experience.”
93 percent of professionals surveyed feel personalization at scale is attainable, but 58 percent are unsure of how to achieve it at scale in their marketing and creative work.
“The findings on AI, personalization, and scalability are all related,” said Nina Brakel-Schutt, Brand Strategist at Widen.
Nina added, “Companies that want to use personalization on a large scale can’t do it without AI tools that study and segment customers in real time. Since marketers largely are not using AI and are unfamiliar with the technology, it makes sense that they would be uncertain about how to scale personalization.”
Using AI, Brands May Spent Over $1 Trillion to Connect to Customers and Partners
The confusion over AI likely influences the B2B ‘martech’ market. In 2017, brands may have spent over $1 trillion on marketing services to connect with consumers, partners, and team members. If marketers are looking for AI but not finding the right solutions, the first AI platforms to gain mass appeal may drive that $1 trillion significantly higher.
Currently, Widen builds high-performing software that empowers organizations to create compelling, meaningful, and measurable digital experiences. Focused on service and fueled by a global community of users, Widen has the highest customer loyalty in the digital asset management (DAM) industry.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive


