WayBlazer Hires First Chief Product Officer To Build Out The Future Of Travel Search

26 Apr 2018

The AI-powered Travel Recommendation Engine Company Brings On Seasoned Product Management Expert To Define Its Strategic Vision And Execute The Product Roadmap
WayBlazer, the AI-powered travel recommendation engine, announced today that Adam Prishtina has joined its senior leadership team as the company’s first chief product officer.
Prishtina brings to the role two decades of Silicon Valley product management experience for digital industry leaders, including PayPal, Yahoo!, AOL, Netscape and BigCommerce, where he worked with cutting-edge technologies and top talent to develop strategic business solutions. As WayBlazer’s chief product officer, Prishtina will carry out the company’s vision for enabling travel brands to deliver contextually relevant and personalized travel recommendations for consumers – and deploying this technology in emerging voice and messaging channels.
In his new role, Prishtina will build out WayBlazer’s product organization, define the long-term product vision and create and execute the roadmap. His immediate priorities include expanding delivery channels to Facebook Messenger and voice-assisted devices and building upon the success of WayBlazer’s recently launched, first-to-market chatbot ad unit.
“With the rapid advancements in AI technology and digital advertising, it is crucial to have a clear and actionable vision for delivering our product roadmap,” said Noreen Henry, CEO of WayBlazer. “Adam brings to the table the perfect combination of experience and passion to support us in our ongoing mission to provide brands with the most efficient and seamless travel search and booking experience possible.”
Adam Prishtina
“WayBlazer shares in my commitment to use technology to help brands improve their customer experience, and I am incredibly excited to join the company as the chief product officer,” said Prishtina. “As an avid traveler, I understand firsthand that planning the perfect vacation can be incredibly cumbersome, both because every traveler’s tastes are unique and because recommendations are often scattered across the digital experience. WayBlazer is redefining the entire travel shopping journey, and it is a privilege to be able to bring my experience for building world-class products to the team to drive the next generation of travel.”
WayBlazer is a B2B company that enables travel brands to provide more relevant and personalized recommendations to consumers through emerging chat and voice channels. The company uses natural language understanding as well as machine learning to make the travel search experience less impersonal and cumbersome for consumers. This comes in the form of an intelligent recommendation engine and travel-centric chat bot that analyzes traveler intent and context to deliver a seamless travel shopping experience.
WayBlazer is founded by travel and tech entrepreneurs Terry Jones, Founder of Travelocity/Founding Chairman of Kayak.com and Manoj Saxena, former GM of IBM Watson.
Read More: Interview With Bryan Gold, Co-Founder, CEO At #Paid


