Linguamatics Extends Text Analytics Leadership In 2017

12 Dec 2017

New Innovations Increase Democratic And Programmatic Access To Text Analytics, Expanding And Speeding The Transformation Of Unstructured Data For Knowledge Discovery
Natural Language Processing (NLP) text analytics provider, Linguamatics, today announced that the company has extended its position as a leading provider of NLP text-mining solutions for healthcare and the life sciences with the introduction of multiple innovations in 2017.
New capabilities include custom search interfaces using I2E web portals, providing much larger, wide-ranging user communities with web access to the benefits of deep NLP capabilities. Programmatic use of I2E is enhanced by I2E AMP, which delivers high-throughput, fault tolerant workflow management for real-time document processing. AMP is deployed at multiple customer sites in a variety of workflows, including safety and regulatory affairs.
Phil Hastings
“Over the last year, more customers have taken advantage of the capabilities of I2E with AMP for ETL (Extract, Transform, and Load) use cases,” said Linguamatics Chief Business Development Officer Phil Hastings. “It’s exciting to see the numerous ways customers are benefitting from the ability to transform their unstructured data to a structured format that can be loaded into data warehouses or data lakes, or consumed by downstream applications for broader access and decision support.”
This year, Linguamatics released two major updates to the I2E platform, adding features that included enhanced results management options, and advances in core capabilities including spelling and OCR correction. In addition, Linguamatics launched its Community site for Linguamatics I2E customers and partners – including a new Developer site for Community members with programming backgrounds who want to learn more about I2E’s technical features and network with other users to share best practices.
Over the past year, Linguamatics customers have expanded their use of I2E to mine EHR data for predictive risk models and quality measurement, and for Real World Evidence analysis of outcomes and patient characteristics. Based on the success of these efforts, Frost and Sullivan recognized Linguamatics with an excellence in best practices award for “Big Data Text Analytics for Healthcare”.
At the 2017 Linguamatics Text Mining Summits, customers shared details about the innovative ways they are leveraging I2E. Client representatives from AstraZeneca, Cancer Research UK, Cell Signaling Technology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Kaiser Permanente, Mundipharma, Penn Medicine, Pfizer, Roche and Sanofi discussed specific I2E use cases, from early drug discovery to clinical applications. Speakers also shared how they’ve successfully escalated their use of artificial intelligence machine-learning technologies, thanks to I2E’s ability to normalize unstructured data to enhance predictive models.
David Milward
“Linguamatics has made outstanding progress this year in providing the benefits of text mining to a wider audience,” said Linguamatics Chief Technology Officer, David Milward. “Our new web portal framework is part of an ongoing strategy to broaden access to powerful NLP capabilities. The development of AMP for highly scalable and fault-tolerant document processing, along with improved SDKs, backed up by the launch of our Community and Developer sites, is increasing the programmatic use of I2E, enabling NLP to underpin multiple applications in enterprise data analysis such as quality checking, extraction of meta-data and detailed relationship extraction.”


