Quanergy Solid State LiDAR Wins Juniper Research Top Automotive Award

23 Jun 2018

The Future Digital Awards Are Awarded To Companies That Have Made Outstanding Contributions To Their Industry And Who Are Positioned To Make A Significant Impact In The Future
Quanergy Systems, Inc., a global leader in the design and development of solid-state LiDAR sensors and smart sensing solutions, today announced that its innovative LiDAR sensors have been selected as Best Consumer Product in Automotive and Telematics by Juniper Research in its annual Future Digital Awards for Technology and Innovation. Audi’s AI Traffic Jam Pilot was named runner-up in the same category. The Future Digital Awards are awarded to companies that have made outstanding contributions to their industry and who are positioned to make a significant impact in the future.
Dr. Louay Eldada
“Juniper’s Future Digital Award is a testament to the hard work our team has put into developing the world’s most affordable and most reliable LiDAR technology and products,” said Dr. Louay Eldada, CEO and co-founder of Quanergy. “With momentous strides made in the autonomous vehicle space, Quanergy continues to deliver innovative solutions, including our S3 solid state LiDAR sensor, that will enable self-driving cars to become mainstream with consumers and on roadways.”
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
Quanergy is the only LiDAR manufacturer to commercially produce an integrated hardware and software platform solution. The patented S3 is the world’s only solid-state LiDAR sensor designed to provide the highest level of performance, reliability, durability and dependability required in safety-critical applications such as autonomous vehicles, while meeting the price point necessary in the automotive industry. Qortex™, a core proprietary perception software platform, is compatible with Quanergy’s full suite of LiDAR sensors and accurately analyzes 3D point cloud data to perform key functions such as object detection, tracking and classification.
The Future Digital Award winners are decided by a panel of expert judges based on a number of criteria, including: product features and user benefits; innovation; commercial partnerships; commercial launches; certification and compliance; and potential future business development. The award program recognizes innovative and promising products across Automotive & Telematics, Smart Homes, Smart Wearables, Digital Health and Emerging & Disruptive Technologies.
Quanergy Systems, Inc. was founded in 2012 and builds on decades of experience of its team in the areas of optics, photonics, optoelectronics, artificial intelligence software and control systems. Headquartered in Sunnyvale, California, in the heart of Silicon Valley, Quanergy offers smart sensing solutions. It is the leading provider of solid-state LiDAR sensors and perception software for real-time capture and processing of 3D spatial data and object detection, tracking and classification. Its sensors are disruptive in price, performance, reliability, size, weight and power. Its solutions are applicable in numerous sectors including transportation, security, industrial automation, 3D mapping, mining, agriculture, drones, robotics, smart spaces and 3D-aware smart devices for improved safety, efficiency and quality of life.
Read More: EY And Microsoft Launch Blockchain Solution For Content Rights And Royalties Management


