Delayed Flight? Blockchain Technology Could Help You Get An Airline Voucher Instantly; TrustaBit Announces Their Token Sale Launch For February 14, 2018

05 Feb 2018

With Trustabit’s revolutionary software, customers will soon be able to receive vouchers instantly and electronically if their flights are delayed or canceled. The TrustaBit token pre-sale will take place from February 5th – 12th with the main token sale running from February 14th to March 15th.
Airlines spend millions each year sending vouchers to disgruntled customers through outdated systems. With Trustabit’ s revolutionary software, customers will soon be able to receive vouchers instantly and electronically if their flights are delayed or canceled. The TrustaBit token pre-sale will take place from February 5th – 12th with the main token sale running from February 14th to March 15th.
The secret to improving the airline customer experience is blockchain technology, says Saritta Hines. Hines is the CEO of Trustabit, a SaaS company that hopes to help airlines leverage the blockchain by automatically sending vouchers to customer accounts.
Hines’ patent pending technology addresses one of the most common complaints from airline customers. “So many airlines require customers to call a phone number and wait on hold just to get their vouchers, exacerbating their frustration at delayed or cancelled flights,” Saritta Hines said. “Blockchain technology gives us another way of doing business – one that is better for the customer and the airline alike.”
Trustabit will allow airlines to set scenarios and amounts into smart contracts, control how vouchers are sent to new or existing accounts, and create branded notifications for customers. This customization will allow them the opportunity to build positive brand experiences at every customer touchpoint.
Hines says that if airlines must invest in a voucher system to make amends to customers, they may as well do it in a way that improves their opinion of the company. “The cost is going to come out either way. The question is, are you going to be paying the money to an angry customer or to a customer who will be loyal for life?”
The initial Pre-Token sale will happen during Feb 5th-12th, 2018 with the Main Token sale commencing on February 14th and ending on March 14th. The minimum crowdsale cap is set to $3 Million USD with all funds being returned to users if the initial investment is not met. The maximum crowd sale cap is set to $49 million USD and contributions will be in ETH only. There will be a total of 1 billion TAB tokens created and the number of tokens one person can purchase will be set to a first come first served basis. Any unsold tokens will be burned at the end of the Main Token Sale and there will never be any more tokens minted. Buyers will receive tokens 14 days after the close of the Main Token sale.


