College Concierge® Announces Decision On Cryptocurrency And AI To Better Assist International Students With Major Purchases

13 Jun 2018

College Concierge® looks to be one of the first players in the higher education support field to offer cryptocurrency as a mode of payment for international student’s essential lifestyle purchases.
College Concierge®, the premier online marketplace assisting US and International university students obtain all of their essential lifestyle needs, announced plans to further their mission to help students better assimilate into US colleges and universities through their “essential lifestyle” mobile platform.
Brett Lippel
College Concierge® is developing plans to accept cryptocurrency for student purchases from housing, automotive, insurance, school/living supplies, and eventually school tuition. “Our research has found in 2018, college students, especially international students, are comfortable transacting in cryptocurrency and it makes total sense for us to accept crypto as payment for many of the student’s major purchases. Our desire to add cryptocurrency to our current ability to accept WeChat Pay, Ali-Pay, and all major credit cards provides us a mobile payment solution that’s completely flexible, and in line with what students expect in 2018.” said Brett Lippel, CEO and founder.
Read More: How Your Small Business Can Tackle GDPR And Comply Today
To better facilitate the needs of international students, and the educational agencies working with these students to place them in US universities, the company announced its plans to deploy AI (artificial intelligence), along with the use of bots to automate and increase the efficiency in the international call centers by the end of 2018.
As part of the company’s mission of “safety, security and saving”, College Concierge’s “Price Protector” guarantees the lowest price on products and services across College Concierge’s best- in-class merchant coalition. The “Price Protector” program stands together with the company’s dedicated, 24-hour student emergency call center. College Concierge® works with most major Universities and Colleges in the United States, along with many Foreign Agencies to provide its’ service to students and their families protecting them from being taken advantage of, or doing without essential lifestyle products when attending school in the US.


