Beyond Limits Wins Artificial Intelligence Category For The Tech Trailblazers Awards

27 Feb 2018

Award Recognizes Company For Their Innovative “Beyond Conventional AI” Software
Beyond Limits, an artificial intelligence (AI) and cognitive computing company, announced that the company has been named the winner for the Tech Trailblazers Award in the category of artificial intelligence. The Tech Trailblazers Award recognizes both established and up-and-coming startups in 16 different categories, and the win adds to the list of media accolades and industry award recognition for Beyond Limits.
Beyond Limits has been named the winner for the Tech Trailblazers Award in the category of artificial intelligence.
Beyond Limits has been named the winner for the Tech Trailblazers Award in the category of artificial intelligence.
Launched in 2014, Beyond Limits is a pioneering artificial intelligence company with a unique heritage from space exploration. With 42 technologies developed for NASA’s famed Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), tested and proven in programs like the Mars Rover and Deep Space missions, the company offers cognitive AI and reasoning systems available for the first time for commercial use. Beyond Limits delivers cognitive solutions with the resilience, reasoning, and autonomy required by the massive scale and unimaginable distances of interplanetary space to improve the performance of industrial and enterprise systems on Earth.
Powered by Beyond Limits innovations, the company’s technology is an evolutionary leap beyond conventional AI to a human-like ability to perceive, understand, correlate, learn, teach, reason and solve problems faster than existing AI solutions. With technologies proven in the unknown and extreme environment of space, Beyond Limits delivers AI software capable of tackling complex industrial and enterprise challenges for leading global customers to transform their businesses and industrial operations.
The advanced intelligence solutions developed by Beyond Limits magnify human talent, enabling people to apply their attention, experience, and their passions to solving problems that truly matter. Many pioneering JPL scientists now work at Beyond Limits, building solutions for companies in down-to-earth industries such as Oil and Gas, Healthcare, Finance, Transportation, and Logistics.
“We are extremely proud and honored to be recognized as the top Artificial Intelligence company by Tech Trailblazers,” says AJ Abdallat, CEO of Beyond Limits. “Beyond Limits is tackling some of the toughest problems enterprises face; whether it’s in energy exploration, healthcare, medical research, or logistics. The technologies we bring to the table have been battle-tested in the demanding environments of space, resulting in AI solutions that are more flexible, powerful, and scalable than conventional AI.”
Beyond Limits was also selected as a nominee for the 2018 Edison Awards, and has been covered in the Wall Street Journal, Financial Times, Forbes, Fortune, Entrepreneur, ZDNet and the International Business Times. The company closed a Series B with BP Ventures in mid-2017 for $20 million, and since then has rapidly expanded staffing with some of the most talented minds in the industry.
Read Also: Interview With Peter Cahill, CEO, Voysis


