With 55 Million Preference Data Points, Utrip Pushes Travel Industry Into The Modern Data Driven Era

31 Oct 2017

Ai-Based Personalized Destination Discovery and Trip Planning Platform Surpasses Four Million Traveler Profiles, Continues Growth Throughout 2017
Utrip, the travel planning platform that combines the best of local expertise, human experience and artificial intelligence, announced that Utrip PRO, the company’s flagship product, has aggregated over four million traveler profiles and 55 million points of traveler preference data through its partnerships with leading travel companies. Leveraging this expansive set of data through Utrip PRO, companies like JetBlue Vacations, Holland America and San Francisco Travel can offer their customers a highly personalized travel planning experience.
While many legacy tools can offer enterprises basic data around a user’s online behavior and demographics, Utrip empowers their partners to better understand customer preferences. The platform not only provides travelers with an intuitive user experience, but it also enables Utrip partners to collect unprecedented, actionable insights about their customers’ desires, dreams and behaviors. Using this data, travel brands can begin to realize traveler intent, interests and purchase behavior to create distinctly personalized marketing campaigns. Utrip is helping its partners deliver the right messages to the right customers, at the right time, by gathering extensive data on travelers.
“In today’s fast-moving, digital world, personalization is everything,” said Gilad Berenstein, CEO and Founder of Utrip. “Some of the most recognizable brands in the world—Amazon, Netflix, Spotify and so many others— have created an expectation of personalization on the web and our industry is no exception. At Utrip, we strive to offer travelers that same level of personalization, and the data we enable our partners to collect enables them to differentiate themselves and to offer a best-in-class digital experience to their consumers. This is an incredible milestone for us, and we look forward to building on this momentum.”
This announcement follows the launch of Utrip’s first multilingual partnership with the Mexican State of Guanajuato to provide international travelers with both Spanish and English content. Earlier this year, Utrip also unveiled it had joined forces with multiple destination marketing organizations (DMOs) including the Colorado Tourism Office, Discover Long Island and Meet Minneapolis.


