LALA World Launches LALA Pay In India

10 Jul 2018

Asian Blockchain-based social business LALA World today announced the launch of its payment services through the LALA World App on Android mobile devices in India. The app allows the user a single point of access to all the financial services as they become available in the LALA World ecosystem.
With the LALA World App, users can create their LALA ID using their email address and mobile number, which will serve as a basis for their digital identity. As the system is built on Blockchain technology, the user’s identity is secure, while still giving them full uncensored and unrestricted access to their data. They will then be able to do the following with their app:
Top-up pre-paid, DTH, and Data Card
Recharge online for 29 service providers
Make bill payments for more than 25 different utility service providers (Telephone, postpaid mobile, gas, broadband and electricity)
Read More: The Promise and Potential of AI for the Insurance Industry
Payments can be made with credit cards, debit cards and net banking via the app without having to travel to physical bank branches or ATMs. LALA World intends to add other services such as international remittance, loans and credit scoring over the coming months.
Founded in 2016, LALA World is an established and fast growing Asian technology company using Blockchain to create a connected financial ecosystem for the unbanked, migrant labourers and refugees — people with limited access to financial services. Its vision is to reach 100 million people by 2020 and bring financial services to the disadvantaged around the world.
Read More: AI Breakthrough Announces Inaugural Award Winners
“Almost 70% of Indians live in rural areas, where access to banks and other financial infrastructure is limited. With the launch of our LALA Pay in our LALA World App for Android devices here, we hope to bring financial services available to this group and align with our vision of creating a financial ecosystem for people with limited access to financial services,” said Sankalp Shangari, Founder and Chief Executive Officer of LALA World.
Read More: Insurtech: the new AI disruption is hitting insurance


