Finom Raises Midterm $37 Million On First Complex Blockchain-Based Platform With AI-Advising

30 Dec 2017

Up to date, financial blockchain corporation Finom AG raised $37 million of $101 declared during tokenized equity offering. The project releases both a security FIN and utility NOM tokens. FIN token is executed pursuant to Regulation D of the U.S. Securities Act of 1933. Its holders will be able to receive dividends and vote as traditional stockholders do. The token sale closes on December 30, 2017.
Finom raises initial $37 million for blockchain platform powered by AI-advising. The corporation grown out of five cryptocurrency companies: Nanopool, TabTrader, Cryptonit exchange, Cryptal mining center and Beetle.io mobile broker that helps to purchase Bitcoin and Ethereum with bank cards. Nanopool is one of the world’s largest Ethereum mining pools. TabTrader provides mobile trading on nearly all major exchanges: Bittrex, Bitfinex, Poloniex, Kraken etc. The companies have a four-year…
Finom makes the world of finance available to everyone by providing a blockchain ecosystem with a single point of entry and AI-assistant. It will help the system adapt to user’s goals and offer relevant solutions.
FIN token is a digital equivalent of Finom’s shares. When purchasing security tokens, each investor gets utility as a bonus in 1:1 proportion. NOM tokens are expected to be listed on cryptocurrency exchanges after the token sale. The NOM token gives commission discounts, along with special privileges attached to using Finom bank cards and Finom advertising system.
The Finom ecosystem will eventually take care of all financial operations including banking integration, payments processing, factoring. Finom plans to introduce cryptocurrency wallets with linked debit cards, launch a cryptocurrency bank with a network of terminals by 2020.
Finom is a financial blockchain corporation grown out of five companies: Nanopool, TabTrader, Cryptonit, Cryptal, Beetle.io. Services already reach 520,000 users.


