What To Expect At Webinar World 2018

30 Jan 2018

Webinar Experts Will Talk Attendees Through Driving Registration And Lead Generation Strategies To Building On-Demand Programs
ON24 is hoping to put the ‘personal’ back in marketing. Their annual conference, Webinar World 2018, is a celebration that focuses on building campaigns and delivering events that put the customer first. If you are a marketer who is looking to recreate this authentic engagement between audience and brand, the conference is a must. Webinar World kicks off on 5 March. The two-day event will take place at the Westin Saint Francis in downtown San Francisco.
It promises to be an immersive deep dive into the world of webinar marketing. From driving registration and lead generation strategies to building on-demand programs, you’ll learn the skills to become true webinar experts.
Speakers Who Are At The Top Of Their Game
Sharat Sharan
Sharat Sharan, Co-Founder, President, and CEO, ON24
Under the leadership of Sharat Sharan and with more than 1,000 customers, ON24 is today the global market share leader in webinars and virtual environments. Sharan was formerly Vice President and General Manager of Hearst New Media and Technology and Vice President of the Hearst New Media Group. Prior to joining Hearst, Sharan was responsible for business development at AT&T Wireless Systems and a member of the AT&T Bell Laboratories technical staff.
Alex Blumberg, Co-founder and CEO, Gimlet Media
Alex Blumberg is the Co-founder and CEO of Gimlet Media, the podcast company behind hit shows like StartUp, Reply All, Homecoming, and more. In 2015, Blumberg started documenting the process of launching Gimlet Media, and those recordings eventually became the podcast, StartUp, that’s currently being adapted into a sitcom for ABC titled Alex, Inc., premiering in 2018. Prior to founding Gimlet, Blumberg worked for years in public radio at NPR as the co-founder/producer of the wildly popular podcasts, This American Life and Planet Money where he won every major award in broadcast journalism, including the Polk, the duPont-Columbia, and the Peabody.
Christina Russo, Campaign Lead and Field Marketing Director, SAP SuccessFactors
Christina is an experienced marketing professional who leads national campaign strategy and execution in North America. In her role, she is responsible for a mix of programs supporting demand generation for SAP SuccessFactors including webinars, digital strategy, events, sales plays, campaign execution, and sales engagement. She works with a variety of cross-functional teams including product marketing, sales, enablement, and global marketing. Christina lives in Philadelphia and in her spare time you can see her on the kickball field or planning her next adventure abroad.
Alena Larson, Director, Demand Generation, Optum/UnitedHealth Group
Alena is the Director of Demand Generation at Optum. In this role, she leads a team of ten digital marketers who create and execute digital communications and integrated campaigns leveraging multiple marketing technologies. She has a proven track record to challenge the status quo and raise the modern marketing bar for Optum. Her passion is generating growth, for companies and individuals, using marketing technology.
Nina Purro, Webinar Program Lead, Campaigns, Salesforce
Nina Purro manages the Corporate Marketing Webinar program at Salesforce. In her role, Nina seeks to deliver a world-class webinar experience, while focusing on cultivating a strong webinar program that engages and educates on Salesforce product value, usage, and client success. She’s passionate about helping Trailblazers share their stories with the world. Prior to joining Salesforce, Nina ran and scaled the webinar program at Glassdoor, including managing virtual events, thought leadership webinars, client training, and product demos. A Los Gatos, California native, Nina earned her bachelor’s degree in Marketing from San Diego State.
Alicia Baumann, Sr. Webinar Producer, Procore Technologies
Alicia Baumann is an experienced marketer and has worked for a number of industries including television, sports, and publishing prior to entering the technology sphere. Alicia joined Procore as the Brand Webinar Producer and runs all potential client and customer facing webcasts. Immediately prior to Procore, Alicia worked as a Marketing Communications Project Manager at a Santa Barbara technology startup. With a Bachelor of Science in Sports Management, Alicia is a cum laude graduate from New York University.
Here’s a list of speakers.
Sessions That Demonstrate Practical Solutions
Stay on top of upcoming trends. On 6 March, attend a keynote about ‘The Future of Human Engagement in an AI-Driven World’. Get your doubts answered in a session entitled ‘How B2B Marketers Can Engage the Modern Buyer’ on the same day.
Must-attend sessions include;
The Making of a Unicorn with Webinars at the Horn
Alicia Baumann, Procore Technologies, speaks about what to do as a marketing professional struggling to boost your webinar-generated revenue. Baumann is a Brand Webinar Producer for a prominent construction project management software company. She talks about building great content and great relationships while investing in reliable and scalable webinar marketing software.
Dapper Deck Design 2.0 – Visual Storytelling
Kate Schmeisser, SendGrid, talks about why design matters and quick tips to uplevel your design game. Schmeisser explores questions about the visual experience. From fonts, images, backgrounds, color schemes, themes, and more, these seemingly mundane choices when designing your webcast decks amount to a considerable portion of your attendees’ experience.
5 Secrets to Creating Buzzworthy Webinars
Learn the magic formula for creating webinars that wow your audience and drive tangible results with Jason Bodin, Director of Public Relations and Communications for Paycom. Bodin will share proven tips for building a scalable webinar strategy designed to help your organization increase brand awareness, engage its target market and boost the bottom line.
Networker’s Paradise
The conference features sessions by leading marketers and industry analysts featuring best practices, live demos, consulting sessions, and practical guidance on webinar, and digital marketing strategy and execution. Sponsors include AMPLive, Certain and SnapApp. Attendees will also have the chance to connect with other industry professionals and gain valuable insight and unique perspectives from leading companies around the world. Two full days of the conference are dedicated to keynote presentations, breakout sessions, case studies, and panel discussions with some of today’s leading brands, including three tracks of sessions covering Marketing Strategy, Webinar Best Practices, and Webinar Execution. With speakers presenting on real-world strategies and organizational best practices, marketers can apply their learnings to make sure you get the most out of their current and future investments.
ON24 is the global leader in webinar-based marketing solutions that drive demand generation and customer engagement platform.


