Drone Aviation To Livestream Emergency Response Technology For Law Enforcement Agencies

05 Jun 2018

It Will Provide A Livestream of B&H Photo’s Aerial Logistics and Emergency Response Technology Expo. The Expo Will Be Held At Suffolk County Police Headquarters Where the FUSE Tether System Will Be Demonstrated In Partnership With Drone Nerds
Drone Aviation Holding Corp. (“Drone Aviation” or the “Company”), a manufacturer of tethered drones and lighter-than-air aerostats today announced that it will provide a livestream of B&H Photo’s Aerial Logistics and Emergency Response Technology Expo. The expo will be held at Suffolk County Police Headquarters where the FUSE Tether System will be demonstrated in partnership with Drone Nerds.
Scheduled for June 5, 2018 in Yaphank, New York, representatives of over 200 local departments and agencies from around the New York-area including the FBI and Secret Service, the New York Police Department Counter Terror Unit, and Nassau and Suffolk County Police and Fire departments, have been invited to attend the event.
In response to several special requests for tethered products, Drone Aviation’s FUSE Tether System has been selected and will be featured in an aerial demonstration at the show. The demonstration will feature how persistent tethered solutions can provide real-time, high definition imagery as well as secure communications for various applications. The Company will demonstrate live streaming capability utilizing its proprietary cellular LTE backhaul technology which is capable of securely distributing full motion video. The livestream will be available from 10:00 am Eastern to 12:00 pm Eastern subject to airspace availability and can be viewed here.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
“Interest in Drone Aviation’s tether system continues to grow as law enforcement and first responders increasingly recognize the tremendous value that longer drone eye-in-the-sky flight duration can have on their operations. Furthermore, as we are now demonstrating, tethered drone technology can provide access to altitude for monitoring and surveillance applications filling the gaps created by current aerial platforms such as helicopters which are expensive to operate,” said Jay Nussbaum, Chairman and CEO of Drone Aviation.
Attendees at the Aerial Logistics and Emergency Response Technology Expo will learn firsthand about Drone Aviation’s tethering technology and products designed to enhance public safety and law enforcement programs and see several different aircraft performing operations in a variety of scenarios, including:
Search and Rescue – Aircraft utilizing thermal imagery to locate a ‘missing person’ in a wooded area
Barricade – Troop deployable rapid air asset during an ‘active shooter’ situation
Crowd Control – Eye in the sky ops for improved situational awareness
Crash Scene Investigation – Autonomous accident scene imaging
Crash Risk Mitigation – Live parachute drop tests of various aircraft
Read More: Interview With Roy Pereira, CEO, Zoom.Ai
The FUSE Tether System is powered by a proprietary mix of hardware and software in a customized power pack and an Automated Smart Tension Control Winch Case with 200 feet of tether supporting 110-volt ground power sources such as portable generators. With the FUSE tethering system, DJI Inspire 2 and M200 users can dramatically and cost-effectively increase drone flight time with uninterrupted power from the ground while benefiting from improved safety. Safety is enhanced by FUSE’s use of an onboard backup power pack and tether connected to the Company’s proprietary automatic tether tension management system. FUSE is based on the same military-grade advanced technology utilized in the Company’s tethered products sold to the US Department of Defense.
Drone Aviation Holding Corp. develops and manufactures cost-effective, compact and rapidly deployable aerial platforms, including lighter-than-air aerostats and electric-powered drones designed to provide government and commercial customers with enhanced surveillance and communication capabilities. Utilizing a patented tether system, Drone Aviation’s products are designed to provide prolonged operational duration capabilities combined with improved reliability, uniquely fulfilling critical requirements in military, law enforcement, commercial, and industrial applications.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive


