Trace3 Partners With NVIDIA To Deliver Accelerated Computing And Machine Learning

09 Feb 2018

Trace3, a pioneer in business transformation solutions, today announced the company has been accepted into NVIDIA’s Deep Learning Professional Services Program.  Trace3 is one of seven elite partners in the program and one of two providing professional services as a member of the program.
Trace3 will play a key role in delivering NVIDIA-based artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning solutions to enterprises worldwide. The NVIDIA partner program will include initiatives to help partners expand capabilities for the integration and deployment of NVIDIA GPU computing solutions, including NVIDIA DGX systems. The initial phase will focus on providing services for deep learning and neural network development for image analysis, natural language processing, and time-series analysis.
Trace3 has been providing big data services to enterprise clients since the launch of their Data Intelligence practice in March 2014. Today, the company has new comprehensive Artificial Intelligence engagements (Server Hardware and Services) in the works at companies in the manufacturing, financial services, and banking industries as well as several other clients in the planning stages for 2018. The NVIDIA portfolio is strategically aligned with Trace3’s core data center infrastructure business and is a logical extension to its partner portfolio which includes manufacturers such as Cisco Systems and NetApp.
“Our Data Intelligence team engages from a business and technical perspective with clients in order to fully comprehend the business and their needs and ultimately develop a solution to deliver the business outcomes the organization requires,” said Carey Moretti, Vice President of Data Intelligence at Trace3. “Our new status with NVIDIA enables us to not only design, but also to deliver, NVIDIA’s industry-leading GPU computing platform. We are now able to combine our high value consulting services with the industry’s leading deep learning and analytics platform to deliver the highest performance and fantastic results to our clients.”
In 2017, Trace3 implemented NVIDIA® DGX™ Server Appliances in collaboration with NVIDIA and now has several more deployments in the pipeline for 2018.  The NVIDIA® DGX™ Systems are built on the new, revolutionary NVIDIA Volta™ GPU platform. Combined with innovative GPU-optimized software and simplified management, these fully integrated solutions deliver groundbreaking performance and results.  As a new member of the Deep Learning Partner program, Trace3 is poised to design and deliver NVIDIA’s industry-leading GPU computing platform to clients worldwide.
“Partners like Trace3 are helping us achieve our goal of democratizing AI,” said Jim McHugh, Vice President and General Manager at NVIDIA. “They understand the complexities of using AI computing to solve real business problems, and can help customers leverage NVIDIA’s AI platforms to deliver tangible business benefits.”
Sandy Salty
“We’re very excited about all the possibilities our elite partnership with NVIDIA will enable Trace3 to provide to our customers.  Enterprises are ready to leverage Artificial Intelligence and our expertise with NVIDIA enables our team to design and install NVIDIA’s GPU and DGX systems providing the industry’s leading advanced machine learning and deep learning capabilities,” said Sandy Salty, Vice President of Strategic Initiatives at Trace3.
Through the NVIDIA Partner Network, the companies will work together to provide integrated solutions and professional services that take advantage of NVIDIA’s GPU computing platform portfolio, focusing on enterprise software development and engineering, allowing businesses to accelerate adoption. Trace3 will combine consulting services with NVIDIA’s industry-leading GPU computing platforms to help businesses, along with data scientists and engineers, to better analyze and manage their growing data to ultimately make data-driven business decisions.


