Blue Ridge Networks Wins 2018 Cybersecurity ‘Hot Company’ InfoSec Award

18 Apr 2018

Blue Ridge Networks announced today that it has been selected as the “Hot Company” award winner in Cybersecurity, in the 2018 InfoSec Awards, presented by Cyber Defense Magazine. This week during the 2018 RSA Conference, Blue Ridge Networks and award winners from every category will be recognized and awarded.
Blue Ridge Networks named ‘Hot Company’ in Cyber Defense Magazine’s 2018 InfoSec Awards.
This is the sixth annual InfoSec awards, honoring the most innovative and valuable contributors to the information security industry. The highly competitive awards program considers the contributions of nearly 3,000 InfoSec organizations around the world, and winners were selected by a committee of certified security professionals, based on their solutions and approach to next generation security threats.
Blue Ridge Networks was selected because of its impressive track record and overall approach to cybersecurity featuring Autonomous Network Segmentation (ANS). Blue Ridge Networks ANS is a self-contained cybersecurity ecosystem that protects organizations from vulnerabilities posed by connected devices, networks, and people. Based on the ‘Zero Trust’ methodology, ANS provides the highest level of security by seamlessly protecting the most sensitive infrastructure and allowing IT teams to focus on more critical functions.
This operationally transparent and versatile overlay solution enables organizations to seamlessly connect, isolate, contain, cloak, and manage users and devices over any transport, anywhere in the world – with minimal network configuration changes. ANS fills a significant need for impenetrable site to site communications, remote access, M2M communications, Industrial IoT/ OT security, and disaster recovery/workload failover. Today, as the complexity of both network devices and the attack methods used to breach them has increased, this strategy has proven to be the most efficient and reliable tactic for cybersecurity.
“For more than 20 years our approach to security has ensured network security by eliminating vulnerabilities at their source,” said John Higginbotham, CEO of Blue Ridge Networks.  “Using advanced network segmentation, isolation, and cloaking, this methodology has successfully and reliably prevented breaches since Blue Ridge Networks was founded. We are incredibly honored to be recognized by the InfoSec community as a leader in cybersecurity solutions as we continue providing the most effective security solutions possible for our customers across industries.”
“Cybercrime, Hactivism, Cyberespionage, Ransomware and malware exploits are all on the rise,” said Gary S. Miliefsky, Publisher, Cyber Defense Magazine. “Blue Ridge Networks has been distinguished as the Hot Company in Cybersecurity from our magazine. They won after we reviewed nearly 3,000 InfoSec companies, globally, because they are an innovator on a mission to help stop breaches and get one step ahead of the next threat, proactively.”


