Drone Aviation Showcases WASP Tactical Aerostat In ADS Warrior Expo East

03 Jul 2018

Event Brings Together More Than 3,000 Military, Federal, State and Local Government Officials
Drone Aviation Holding Corp. (“Drone Aviation” or the “Company”), a manufacturer of tethered drones and lighter-than-air aerostats, today announced that it has been invited to participate in the upcoming ADS Warrior Expo East, scheduled for July 11th and 12th in Virginia Beach, VA.
Drone Aviation’s Winch Aerostat Small Platform (WASP) Tactical Aerostat.
Warrior Expo is an invite-only event designed to showcase the latest technology and products designed for military, federal, state and local government agencies, law enforcement and first responders allowing customers to engage directly with manufacturers. At the event, the Company will showcase its enhanced WASP tactical aerostat highlighting its advanced ISR (Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance) and communications capabilities and the various payloads it can support. Drone Aviation’s products will be on display at its booth #1024. Drone Aviation has received a number of repeat customer orders for the WASP over the past year as the result of a growing number of successful international deployments with military personnel.
“Interest in the WASP from the Department of Defense and governmental agencies is growing, and as the premier procurement partner, ADS is playing a vital role in our efforts to bring the benefits of persistent, mobile and tactical ISR and communications to our troops and security forces,” said Jay Nussbaum, Chairman and CEO of Drone Aviation. “We are excited to once again participate in this marquee event, meeting with key decision makers who are seeking persistent and cost-effective aerial solutions which enable them to meet current and future mission requirements.”
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc
The WASP is a highly tactical and mobile aerostat system which can be operated by as few as two soldiers and can provide day/night video, secure multi-frequency and multi-waveform wireless communication range extension capability at the edge of the battlefield from either a fixed, stationary position or while being towed. Over the past four years, U.S. Army-owned WASP systems have successfully completed thousands of hours of soldier training operations, various DoD exercises, and customer operations. WASP is currently being utilized by the DoD as a mobile, tactical aerial solution that can support multi-mission profiles involving ground and aerial-based assets through communication retransmission. Operating at altitudes of up to 1,500 feet AGL, the WASP system can significantly extend ISR capabilities and secure communications in remote and austere locations. The soldier-operated systems can be rapidly configured to support a variety of mission requirements for days, weeks or months with customized payloads.
Drone Aviation Holding Corp. develops and manufactures cost-effective, compact and rapidly deployable aerial platforms, including lighter-than-air aerostats and electric-powered drones designed to provide government and commercial customers with enhanced surveillance and communication capabilities. Utilizing a patented tether system, Drone Aviation’s products are designed to provide prolonged operational duration capabilities combined with improved reliability, uniquely fulfilling critical requirements in military, law enforcement, commercial, and industrial applications. For more information about Drone Aviation, please visit www.DroneAviationCorp.com or view our reports and filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission at http://www.sec.gov, including the Risk Factors included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, as well as information in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications


