Arcusys Partners With Liferay To Bring Premium Digital Learning Solutions To The UK Market

13 Apr 2018

Arcusys’ Valamis on Liferay introduces the UK to a Learning Experience Platform — Customisable Corporate Academy Option For Training Personnel And External Channel Networks
Arcusys Ltd, an international forerunner in the digital transformation of learning, has announced its partnership with leading digital experience platform provider Liferay in the United Kingdom. This new UK partnership provides companies with easier access to end-to-end workforce transformation solutions.
Arcusys, a successful Liferay partner in Finland since 2011 and in the United States since 2015, provides its customers with a competitive edge through effective and engaging working and learning tools. Emerging technologies, including Artificial Intelligence (AI), are becoming a central part of the workforce and organizations are faced with upskilling their employees, partners, resellers, and subcontractors to remain competent, compliant and effective.
Every industry is currently being revolutionized by new technology and regulations, but especially the financial services industry which accounts for more than 2 million jobs in the UK. Arcusys’ UK office is stationed in London, the financial center of the world, helping companies adapt in the fourth industrial revolution with Valamis – Learning Experience Platform and Intelligent Automation solutions.
Janne Hietala
“We are very excited about this new partnership in the UK. Scalable Liferay technology combined with Valamis represents eLearning of the future. We’re developing analytical tools and intelligent automation for making working more efficient and learning more personalized with our customers, partners and own data scientist and analyst teams”, said Janne Hietala, Chief Commercial Officer of Arcusys.
“We are very pleased to welcome Arcusys to the UK and Ireland market. The Arcusys team has accrued considerable expertise developing and delivering Liferay-based intranets and its highly regarded Valamis solution serves a growing need for solutions that improve employee experience and effectiveness,” said Michael MacAuley, General Manager Liferay UK & Ireland.
Valamis implements corporate learning and development needs into a customisable corporate academy that supports many different learning styles, including but not limited to formal, informal, social, macro- and microlearning. Platform enhancements are released on a quarterly basis, and are co-developed together with customers and partners to support their unique learning needs.


