ApolloMed And 42 Interactive To Present Results Of Predictive Analytics Study At The 1st International Conference On Artificial Intelligence In Healthcare

05 Mar 2018

Apollo Medical Holdings, Inc., an integrated population health management company focused on value-based care, and 42 Interactive, Inc. (“42i”) (formerly Helynx, Inc.), a technology company that has developed a next-generation machine learning and data discovery platform, announced that they will present the results of a study based on ApolloMed ACO patients at the 1st International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare.
The conference, which takes place from March 7-9 at the Langham Huntington Hotel in Pasadena, California, gathers world-renowned experts, including speakers from Harvard Medical School, MIT, IBM Watson Health, Imperial College London and Taipei Medical University.  ApolloMed and 42i’s study, “Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Improved Prediction of Adverse Health Events”, used 42i’s analytics engine to predict emergency department visits and hospital admissions on 30,000 patients in ApolloMed’s accountable care organization (“ACO”).
Warren Hosseinion
The study was carried out by Chess Stetson, Ph.D., Boris Revechkis, Ph.D., and Kris Chaisanguantham, Ph.D. from 42i and Diane Pham, M.D. from ApolloMed.  Dr. Stetson will be presenting the study on March 8th at 5:20pm just prior to the conference gala dinner.
Chess Stetson
“ApolloMed has been at the forefront of the intersection of artificial intelligence and healthcare.  Our collaboration with Dr. Stetson and his team at 42i began in 2015 and continues to produce important insights for us,” stated Warren Hosseinion, M.D., Co-Chief Executive Officer of Apollo Medical Holdings. “We plan on expanding our efforts in this space and will be dedicating more people and resources from the data analytics and IT teams at Network Medical Management, our management services organization.”
“Machine learning, combined with expert clinical knowledge, can provide completely new insights into improving patient care and reducing the cost of care,” stated Chess Stetson, Ph.D., Chief Executive Officer of 42i, Inc. “Our goal is to help ApolloMed prevent avoidable adverse outcomes for its patients.”


