DeepLearni.ng Announces Official Partnership With Vector Institute

23 Feb 2018

The Vector Institute Was Launched In 2017 With Funding Commitments From Canada’s National And Provincial Governments And More Than 30 Companies
DeepLearni.ng, a leading AI company based in Toronto, announced today an official partnership with the Vector Institute, an organization fostering Canada’s leading-edge advancements in artificial intelligence. Based in Toronto and guided by some of the world’s leading AI researchers, including Geoffrey Hinton, the Vector Institute was founded to retain and attract the world’s best AI talent to Canada.
“In our work with enterprises around the world, our team of machine learning practitioners strives to transform the latest AI research into real-world business applications. Joining the Vector Institute is an exciting opportunity to give back to the community, and ensure AI’s leading researchers have the resources they need to take the field to the next level,” says Stephen Piron, the company’s co-founder and co-CEO.
The Vector Institute was launched in 2017 with funding commitments from Canada’s national and provincial governments and more than 30 companies. DeepLearni.ng is joining a network of Vector Institute partners that are industry leaders, including NVIDIA, Google and Shopify. Canada’s national and provincial governments and the University of Toronto have also partnered with the Vector Institute. As recently announced by the Ontario government, one of the Institute’s key objectives is to work with partners to be among the world’s top producers of graduates with expertise in machine learning and deep learning.
“Canadian start-up and scale-up companies like DeepLearni.ng have an important role to play in building Canada’s AI ecosystem. As a Bronze-level sponsor of the Vector Institute, DeepLearni.ng will support Vector’s mission to grow Canada’s pool of world-class talent in machine learning and deep learning, and advise Vector on opportunities to collaborate and create opportunities for start-ups and scale-ups. In turn, this will foster economic growth by ensuring Canadian industry and institutions have the people, skills, and resources to be best in class at the use of AI,” said Darin Graham, the Vector Institute’s Industry Innovation VP.
Recently, DeepLearni.ng also announced its role as the first Canadian partner in NVIDIA’s Partner Network of deep learning companies. By partnering with global AI leaders, DeepLearni.ng’s team plans to advance the field by transforming the technology’s potential into measurable business impact.
DeepLearni.ng is an AI technology company that blueprints, builds and deploys deep learning solutions designed for enterprise complexity. In their flagship project, the company deployed one of the world’s first deep learning systems for retail banking. DeepLearni.ng was founded in 2016 and is headquartered in Toronto
Read More: Prophesee Announces Initial Closing Of $19M Funding


