Nuvo Group Names Amit Reches As Vice President, AI And Information

11 Jul 2018

Nuvo Group, LTD, an emerging leader in maternal-fetal connected health, has named Amit Reches as Vice President, AI and Information. In this role, Mr. Reches will lead the company’s technological efforts in artificial intelligence in Nuvo Group’s patented sensor-based wearable monitoring technology, big data analytics, and cloud-based platform.
Oren Oz
“We are pleased to welcome Amit Reches to Nuvo Group and look forward to working with him to bring his vision and extensive experience of multi-disciplinary research in the field of biomedical devices to help us further establish Nuvo Group as a global leader in AI and maternal-fetal health,” said Oren Oz, Founder and CEO of Nuvo Group. “With the addition of Amit to our team, we continue to build upon the company’s utilization, data science and machine learning efforts to deliver leading-edge solutions designed to advance the delivery of maternal-fetal care.”
Follow Us
Amit Reches
Mr. Reches joins Nuvo Group from ElMindA ltd., a biomedical company, where he most recently served as Vice President of R&D. In this role, Mr. Reches spearheaded a diverse multiple-team group of data scientists, researchers, algorithm developers, and engineers, leading the process of gradual transition from core algorithm and technological concept to the commercialization of a state-of-the art FDA and CE approved AI-based platform.
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
“I am honored to join such a talented team dedicated to advancing how we manage pregnancy. I hope my past experience and capabilities will help Nuvo advance in this AI health age,” said Mr. Reches. “My goal is to bring my knowledge to help further build Nuvo’s capability toward its bold ambition to transform maternal fetal health and create value through new care delivery models and data powered pathways. I firmly believe that Nuvo is uniquely positioned to disrupt the field from a data perspective, and that through the utilization of rapidly advancing AI, we will be able to create more personalized pregnancy monitoring and management tools.”
Mr. Reches holds a BsC in computer science and business administration cum laude from Tel-Aviv University, and a PhD from the Technion Institute of Technology in Neuroscience. His work has been published in numerous journals and patents, and has been recognized in several national and international awards. Mr. Reches holds the rank of Major in the IDF, and has received the chief-of-staff medal of honor for excellence in service.
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs


