Æternity Partners With Papers.ch To Implement Super-Secure Cold-Signing And Instant Micro-payment Solutions

11 Jul 2018

Papers.ch Will Assist æternity in Implementing Instant Micro-Payment Solutions and Integrating Airgap, the Most Secure Cold Storage and Accessible Wallet Solution
Today,  æternity, a blockchain 3.0 platform designed to deliver unmatched efficiency, transparent governance, and global scalability, announced a partnership with Papers.ch, Paper.ch is a Swiss technical service provider and consultancy firm for blockchain projects. Papers.ch will assist with the launch of the æternity mainnet, the implementation of instant micro-payment solutions and the integration of AirGap, the security measure developed by Papers.ch which provides the most secure means of storage and the most user-friendly wallet solution.
Read More: Socialbakers Analytics Report Predicts a France Versus England Final?
The integration of the AirGap security measure involves installing the AirGap Vault application on old mobile phones which are then disconnected and isolated from any network, or air-gapped, making them inaccessible to third-party hacks. To ensure the highest security possible, the private key generation is seeded with additional entropy like audio and video.
AirGap Vault creates a QR code for signed transactions, which can be scanned and broadcasted with the AirGap Wallet app. The private key is only accessible in the secure enclave of the phone through fingerprint and password. This system ensures the private key never leaves the air-gapped phone. With longer-term objectives, the partnership between æternity and Papers.ch will implement micro-payment solutions using æternity’s unique state channel technology, further driving mainstream adoption of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies.
Read More: Attivo Networks® Sweeps the 13th Annual IT World Awards 2018
Commenting on the partnership, æternity Founder Yanislav Malahov said, “The strong experience of the Papers.ch team in helping companies use blockchain technology will be invaluable as we work towards our mainnet launch. AirGap is the gold standard in crypto wallets and secure storage and this partnership is (a) further demonstration of our commitment to building the most accessible and reliable platform as possible.”
Papers.ch is a Swiss technical service provider for blockchain projects and companies, offering development and consulting. The company is addressing issues that have hindered the mainstream adoption of blockchain technology such as volatility, scalability, security, and usability, as well as education. Papers.ch is actively engaging with various leading projects, spearheading a mission to further drive cryptocurrency adoption for both the general public and enterprises.
“Working with the æternity team as they prepare for their mainnet launch is a landmark opportunity, and we are very excited to work alongside a company with innovation at its core. Currently, we are working on integrating our secure key generation and wallet solution, AirGap, with æternity’s Base æpp and we look forward to collaborating further on the journey to mainstream adoption,” said Papers.ch Founder Alessandro De Carli.
“Since our inception, we have prided ourselves as a frontrunner in the space with technical expertise, a long-term vision, and a community-focused mindset and these values are amplified as we lead up to our mainnet launch. I look forward to tapping into the expertise of the Papers.ch team to ensure the smooth delivery of æternity mainnet,” concluded Malahov.
Read More: RTI CEO to Deliver Keynote Address at Third Annual IoT Global Innovation Forum
Founded in 2016 by Yanislav Malahov, æternity is designed to deliver unmatched productivity, transparent governance, and global scalability. A next-generation open-source, public blockchain built to support a global user base, æternity can handle large volumes of value transfers and decentralized applications in parallel. The æternity mainnet launch is set to take place during August of this year.
Founded in 2016, æternity is an open-source, blockchain-based distributed computing platform that builds on decentralized cryptographic P2P technology. Designed to deliver unmatched productivity, transparent governance, and global scalability, æternity offers blockchain technology with a consensus mechanism that is as efficient and cost-effective as possible.
Recommended Read: LALA World Launches LALA Pay in India


