Intuition Systems Forays Into Automobile Business By Forming KAT Motors

23 Jan 2018

Will Develop Intelligent, Semi-Autonomous, Electric & Hybrid, Pollution Free, Cost-Effective, Reliable Urban Automobiles Exclusively Designed To Serve Crowded Indian And Asian Cities At Present And The Future
Founded in 2013, Intuition Systems is a leading and fast-growing Artificial Intelligence (AI) company in India, now spreading wings across Asia-Pacific with IVE-POS line of POS and payment products. Made in India, Intuition systems was recently named by top tech magazines as top 5 POS and Top 30 preferred tech work places in India. Intuition Systems is the first POS system company that used an AI-based software platform for restaurant and retail industry, first ever to do so in India.
Introducing KAT Motors
Transportation is a huge problem in fast-growing economies like India. The major problems, especially in Indian cities, include crowded cities, high pollution, unsafe roads, poor logistics, unintelligent and unreliable ancient motors. Intuition systems with its expertise in developing AI-based products want to solve some of these problems. Intuition Systems will develop and test urban commuter automobiles under the brand name KAT Motors. Intelligent, semi-autonomous, electric & hybrid, pollution free, cost-effective, reliable urban automobiles exclusively designed to serve crowded Indian and Asian cities at present and the future. The first automobile will be introduced by 2020. Intuition Systems will also simultaneously test the feasibility of efficient, autonomous airborne consumer transportation vehicles to take the load off Indian roads.
‘AI’ under the hood
KAT Motors will be powered by a powerful Artificial Intelligence platform called “Ive”. “Ive” is an extension of the proprietary AI platform previously developed by Intuition Systems for payments and POS industry. The first prototype currently being built will be an autonomous, electric/hybrid, cost, time & space efficient vehicle code named ‘Project-Puli’. Kat Motors is targeting an India2020 release.
Anand Asaithambi
Anand Asaithambi, Co-founder of Intuition, said, “Kat Motors will revolutionise conventional transportation in India. Recently, Delhisuffered from severe pollution crisis, this could be averted if we have KAT Motors’ ‘Puli’ on the road.”
Asaithambi added, “Intuition Systems will use an advanced AI and electric/engine hybrid system to power these new lines of semi-autonomous cars and will compete with leading companies across the globe, and has the potential to emerge as a clear leader in India very soon.”
Intuition Systems is open to taking new talent into their fold from engineering background. Final year students or freshers from automobile, aeronautical, electronics, electrical and computer branches are encouraged to apply.
Intuition Systems is an Indian AI company founded in 2013 by Asai brothers, Arun Asaithambi and Anand Asaithambi to revolutionise payment and POS industries. The core strength of the company is artificial intelligence, robotics, biotech and genomics. The company is currently extending its product lines across multiple industries including transportation, space systems


