USU To Unveil ‘Knowledge Center’, A New Customer-First Solutions For Digital Customer Service

15 May 2018

USU Showcases New Customer-First Solutions for Digital Customer Service at the ICMI Contact Center Expo
“Customer first!”
Unymira, a division of USU, is staying true to that motto at the 2018 ICMI Contact Center Expo to be held at the Walt Disney World® Resort in Orlando from 21-24 May. Unymira’s experts will give live, practical demonstrations of their innovations in the field of smart digital customer service at one of the most important events for the industry in the US Knowledge Center offers an innovation in knowledge management that helps to put the customer first! Such as a self-learning search that is based on AI, this helps service centers workers to provide better customer service.
Unymira’s expansion of customer-first portfolio in this area is complemented by customized applications, portal, and CMS solutions, UX design, and social media management.
Unymira also offers a best in class Web Self Service and an intelligent Chatbot, these provide customer-centric organizations with better tools to support customers. As a result, the customer experience and key performance indicators (KPIs), such as the first-call resolution rate and call handling time in customer service, can be significantly improved.
Unymira’s New Version of Knowledge Center
Knowledge Center is the heart of knowledge management at many service organizations. Knowledge Center’s ACTIVE document technology is unique and is a new standard in the service center world. Version 6.9 offers an improved search experience: the AI-powered search. Users are able to train the bot on the basis of their daily searches. The result is a constantly growing pool of questions, synonyms, and terms in an industry and language, enabling users to find the precise documents they need.
New Functions for Web Self-Service
The smart web self-service solution Knowledge First now boasts significantly improved integration, particularly for one-page sites. The application can leverage the knowledge base’s content, and can also offer users enhanced service functions, such as push messages and filters. The dynamic provision of tailored information helps resolve customer queries to suit their needs, any time, anywhere.
New Knowledge Bot Solution
With its Knowledge Bot, Unymira enables content from the central knowledge base to be used in the bot dialogs – a logical continuation of the trend toward service automation. The use of text-based dialogs also allows knowledge from Knowledge Center to be offered on websites or in social networks. Users can maintain knowledge in a structured, simple and efficient way, ensure its quality and make it readily available. The integrated learning function means the bot can be trained by agents’ daily work and automatically improved. Knowledge Bot is also able to integrate components from other vendors such as Facebook or Microsoft.
With intelligent solutions and expertise in digital interaction, Unymira is a prime mover in the digitization of business processes. Standard software and consulting services help to automate service processes and actively provide knowledge for all communication channels and customer contact points in sales, marketing, and customer service.


