Lionbridge To Host Silicon Valley Innovation Symposium: How Artificial Intelligence Impacts Global Business

07 Sep 2017

Lionbridge Clients and Partners Invite Global brands to Discuss Best Practices for Using AI to Improve Customer Experience
Lionbridge Technologies, Inc. today announced that it will host its Global Innovation Symposium on September 21, 2017 from 1-6:30 p.m. PT at The GlassHouse in San Jose, Calif. The event will bring together marketing and product professionals from global companies to discuss and explore strategies for leveraging language and AI to enhance global customer engagement.
During the half-day symposium, thought leaders in AI, machine learning and language will address the challenges and opportunities associated with using AI and deep learning to create personalized experiences for customers across the globe. The event will feature a keynote session from Falon Fatemi, CEO & Founder of Node, who will discuss the future of AI and human interaction. Attendees will also hear presentations from Ben Levy, Co-Founder of AI Venture Capital Firm BootstrapLabs, Demandbase CMO Peter Isaacson, DigitalGenius Co-Founder and CSO Mikhail Naumov, Zeta GlobalCTO Christian Monberg and BrightFunnel CEO Chris Mann.
“Artificial intelligence is radically changing the way companies do business and how they interact with their customers,” said Fatemi. “It’s critical for today’s companies to understand how to effectively leverage the data explosion and emergence of AI to present relevant information at the right moment to drive business growth and outperform their competition.”
Topics to be addressed include:
The key role language plays in intelligent devices
The value of investing in AI and machine learning early on
How AI changes content creation and delivery methods
Ensuring usability and customer satisfaction around the globe
Tips and tricks to keep your marketing agile for the always-on consumer
The event will conclude with a panel discussion on the human element of AI and the impact of language. Participants of the panel include Katell Jentreau, Globalization Manager at Netflix, Mimi Hills, Director of Product Globalization at VMware and Anna Schlegel, Senior Director of Globalization at NetApp and author of ‘Truly Global: The Theory and Practice of Bringing Your Company to International Markets’.
“As AI and machine learning transform entire industries, today’s companies are challenged with determining how to use these technologies to their advantage across the globe,” said Clint Poole, CMO and Senior Vice President, Lionbridge. “AI provides enormous opportunities across the business from product development, to streamlining marketing reporting, to delivering personalized content. We are excited to bring together experts from some of the world’s most inspiring global companies to share best practices for using AI to transform customer engagement.”


