SynLogics’ Announces Addition Of Data Science Vertical To Their Service Portfolio

05 Feb 2018

Showcases robust innovations including Microsoft Power BI, Tableau, and Open Source ETL Tools like Informatica & Talend
SynLogics Inc announced adding Data Science vertical and robust business intelligence tools such as Tableau and Microsoft Power BI to its service portfolio in order to offer cost effective analytical solutions to their clients. This brings SynLogics proven consulting experience into business intelligence domain to create data engineering models specific to the enterprise needs for solving complex data science problems. Tableau data analytics is a robust Business Intelligence (BI) and Data Visualization tool that will add to the comprehensiveness of the SynLogics’ business solutions.
SynLogics, a leader in full-service enterprise solutions for businesses in order to improve the overall organization efficiency, announced adding data science to offer the best business intelligence tools at an affordable cost. SynLogics would now be offering analytics as part of their SaaS Platform development solutions integrating BI Tools for advanced interactive reporting.
Enhance The Use Of Data In Your Organization Using Tableau Data Analytics
This addition is aimed towards helping the business users to effectively and quickly analyze data using the Business intelligence tools that enable organizations to better align and also to drive more consistent and intuitive business decisions.
Advantages of Business Intelligence Tool – Tableau
Thorough Data Analytics: Tableau is a tool that empowers people across the organization to manage their data efficiently in real-time. It is a great tool for data analytics that works effortlessly with massive databases and allows the organizations to have a single interface for entire data management.
Enhance Business Impact: A robust data platform such as tableau enables enterprises to collect, store and manage the huge amount of data to easily identify trends, patterns, and large datasets. This, in turn, leads to better business insights and optimization of business processes. It also allows the users to leverage this business intelligence tool to search data instantly and identify business trends and patterns.
Consolidate Data: Tableau is a robust data tool that significantly reduces the time and effort in seeing individual data reports and patterns. It allows the businesses to consolidate large data sets for better business decisions. Furthermore, irrespective of enterprise systems used by the business enterprise, users can integrate it with any of the data sources.


