Cybereason’s ‘DEEP Hunting Tour’ Stops In 50 Cities Across The United States

20 Feb 2018

DHT Is A Live Simulation Of Real-Life Cyber Attacks, Including Cutting-Edge Malware And Methodologies That The Attackers Are Using Today
Cybereason, creators of the leading cybersecurity data analytics platform including endpoint detection and response, next-generation antivirus, and active monitoring services, today announced the expansion of its DEEP Hunting Tour. The tour gets underway February 21 in Tampa, FL and Portland, OR and will stop in 50 cities across the United States and Canada.
When the DEEP Hunting Tour (DHT) launched in Q4, 2017, it regularly drew standing room only crowds. DHT is a live simulation of real-life cyber attacks, including cutting-edge malware and methodologies that the attackers are using today. Attendees will see malicious operations from the viewpoints of the attacker, victim and security analyst and learn about the newest strategies attackers are using. Attendees will also be educated on how advanced hunting engines can help detect behavioral patterns within a network and learn how to get in front of an attack before it happens, rather than being reactive.
2018 DEEP Threat Hunting Tour Schedule Preview (first 10 stops):
2/21: Tampa, FL
2/21: Portland, OR
2/22: Seattle, WA
2/27: San Francisco, CA
2/28: Los Angeles, CA
2/28: Providence, RI
2/28: Buckhead, GA
3/1: Atlanta, GA
3/1: Des Moines, IA
3/1: Hartford, CT
Cybereason, creators of the leading cybersecurity data analytics platform, gives the advantage back to the defender through a completely new approach to cybersecurity. Cybereason offers endpoint detection and response (EDR), next-generation antivirus (NGAV), and active monitoring services, all powered by its proprietary data analytics platform. The Cybereason suite of products provides unmatched visibility, increases analyst efficiency and effectiveness, and reduces security risk. Cybereason is privately held, having raised $189 million from top-tier VCs, and is headquartered in Boston, with offices in London, Tel Aviv, and Tokyo.
Earlier in January, Cybereason announced their newest international office in Sydney and announced partnerships with NEXTGEN Distribution and Seccom Global. Cybereason also announced the hiring of Charles Cote as its Australia/New Zealand Regional Director.


