DMA Selects OneTrust For GDPR Privacy Programme And Marketing Compliance

26 Jun 2018

The UK’s Top Organisation For Data-Driven Marketers Will Leverage OneTrust For Its Internal GDPR and ePrivacy Compliance Programme
DMA, the UK’s member-based network of 1,000 data-driven marketing companies, today announced it selected OneTrust, the global leader in privacy management and marketing compliance software to automate its privacy programme for compliance with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and impending ePrivacy Regulation.
DMA will leverage many OneTrust modules to operationalize their privacy and marketing compliance activities. DMA will use OneTrust for assessment automation, including privacy impact assessments and data protection impact assessments (PIA/DPIAs) and data mapping to maintain records of processing activities. DMA will also implement the full OneTrust Marketing and Web Compliance suite of products, including Universal Consent Management, Data Subject Access Rights Request, and Cookie Consent and Website Scanning.
“Marketers across the UK look to the DMA for research, guidance and best practice, particularly when it comes to the complex challenges of compliance with GDPR and ePrivacy legislation,” said Rachel Aldighieri, MD at the DMA. “When we were assessing the needs for our internal privacy management, OneTrust was the clear leader in the market and able to provide a solution that fits our needs perfectly. Their technology is backed by deep regulatory research and helps automate an otherwise complicated process of privacy and marketing compliance.”
Kabir Barday
“We’ve built the industry’s most widely used and innovative marketing compliance and privacy management technology and are excited to partner with DMA to help automate and operationalize their GDPR efforts,” said Kabir Barday, OneTrust CEO and Fellow of Information Privacy (FIP). “Marketers across the UK look to the DMA for guidance and best practices for GDPR compliance, and we’re proud to be the solution that the DMA has selected for its own GDPR, marketing compliance and privacy programme management.”
The DMA is a UK trade association for the one-to-one marketing industry – those companies that speak directly to their customers and those companies that help them achieve this. The DMA provides best-practice guidelines and legal services for its members, who are typically marketing, advertising and data-driven organizations.
More than 1,000 companies in the UK are DMA members. The DMA also holds industry events, conducts research and publishes reports, lobbies for legislation to support its members’ business practices and has a close working relationship with the Information Commissioner’s Office.
OneTrust is the global leader in privacy management and marketing compliance software. More than 1,500 customers, including 200 of the Global 2,000, use OneTrust to comply with data privacy regulations across sectors and jurisdictions, including the EU GDPR and ePrivacy (Cookie Law). An additional 7,000 organizations use OneTrust’s technology through a partnership with the International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP), the world’s largest global information privacy community.
The software, available in 50+ languages, is backed by over 15 awarded patents and can be deployed in an EU cloud or on-premise. The comprehensive platform is based on a combination of intelligent scanning, regulator guidance-based questionnaires, automated workflows and developer plugins used together to automatically generate the record keeping required for an organization to demonstrate compliance to regulators and auditors. The platform is enriched with content from hundreds of templates based on the world-class privacy research conducted by our 100+ in-house certified privacy professionals.
OneTrust helps organisations implement GDPR requirements, including Data Protection by Design (PbD), Data Protection Impact Assessments (PIA/DPIA), Vendor Risk Management, Incident and Breach Management, Records of Processing (Data Mapping), Universal Consent and Preference Management, ePrivacy Cookie Consent, Data Subject Access Rights, Portability and Right to Be Forgotten.
PrivacyConnect, OneTrust’s global user community, hosts in-person workshops in over 40 international cities, and is attended by thousands of privacy professionals to share best practices.
OneTrust is co-headquartered in Atlanta, GA and in London, UK, with additional offices in Munich, Bangalore and Hong Kong. The fast-growing team of privacy and technology experts surpasses 400 employees worldwide.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu


