Webgility Announces Enhanced Integration With Xero

31 Mar 2018

Integration Between Ecommerce Software Leader and Fast-Growing Cloud Accounting Platform Automates Operations, Boosts Productivity, and Drives ROI
Webgility, Inc., the leader in ecommerce automation software in the small and medium business market, today announced an integration enhancement to the partnership with global cloud accounting platform, Xero. The integration between Webgility Unify software and Xero enables multichannel sellers to automate operations and reduce data entry. By streamlining inventory, invoicing, and payments, companies have more time to focus on growing their business and increasing revenue.
The integration between Webgility Unify software and Xero enables multichannel sellers to automate operations and reduce data entry. By streamlining inventory, invoicing, and payments, companies have more time to focus on growing their business and increasing revenue.
Steven Larsen
“Xero’s open app ecosystem gives our users the opportunity to select the technology that best suits their unique needs and requirements as they grow,” says Steven Larsen, Product Partnerships Director at Xero. “Webgility Unify’s integration with Xero enables small business owners and their advisors to track sales and automate accounting across online marketplaces and ecommerce tools. Managing a business’ finances from a central dashboard is a far more beautiful experience.”
Parag Mamnani
A new enhancement to Webgility Unify makes the integration particularly beneficial to Xero customers who sell on Amazon. Webgility 1-Click Accounting for Amazon makes it fast and easy for sellers to post Amazon Marketplace orders, refunds, expenses, and payments into Xero. Unify users can now swiftly reconcile their Xero accounting with their Amazon Settlement Report, eliminating the need for any additional data entry or a separate clearing account. Webgility Unify automatically syncs the Amazon Settlement Report with Xero, making batch reconciliation easy for both sellers and accountants.
“With 1-Click Accounting, we’re revolutionizing the way Amazon sellers run their business,” says Parag Mamnani, founder and CEO, Webgility. “Making sense of Amazon costs can be dizzying and sellers spend countless hours on data entry and bookkeeping. Webgility Unify for Xero helps Amazon sellers save hours each day, get powerful insights, improve their margins, and transform their ecommerce operations.”


