Kwikee Launches Research-and-development Team, Leveraging AI And Other Technologies To Drive Efficiencies And Innovation In E-commerce

11 Jul 2018

Kwikee Labs is a dedicated team aimed at finding new solutions for brands and retailers
Kwikee, the leading platform for the management and distribution of branded product content and data for consumer-products manufacturers and retailers, launched Kwikee Labs – a team of entrepreneurial developers focused on new and innovative uses of Kwikee’s product-content database to improve the overall e-commerce ecosystem. Kwikee Labs will be jointly located in downtown Toronto and at Kwikee’s global headquarters in Peoria, Illinois.
Rob McCarthy
“We believe adding a nimble, dedicated team focused on scalable and flexible product-data innovation further solidifies Kwikee’s role as a valued e-commerce partner for brands and retailers,” said Rob McCarthy, CMO and president of digital for sgsco, Kwikee’s parent company. “Ultimately, our goal is to enhance sales of our clients’ brands and work with our retail partners to improve enterprise operations and ensure the optimal shopping environment for their customers, thus creating a synchronized marketplace between the physical and digital shelves.”
Follow Us
Kwikee Labs will feature an accomplished team of software-development veterans with experience in artificial intelligence and machine learning as well as digital strategy, innovation, marketing and global technology platforms for retail and consumer product companies. The team members have all demonstrated a proven ability to solve problems by combining technology and ingenuity. The lab will be focused on research into AI technologies and how they can be applied to improve e-commerce.
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
The addition of the Kwikee Labs team follows multiple updates and improvements made to the Kwikee platform to further enhance functionality for manufacturers and retailers. These updates allow manufacturers to centralize, update and control all brand assets within Kwikee for content visibility, enhancement and distribution. Retailers can instantly obtain free and accurate brand assets and customized content.
“The platform updates, combined with the dedicated Kwikee Labs team and sgsco resources, help our clients and their retailers accurately and successfully respond to customers’ expectations across the widest range of channels,” said McCarthy. “As the marketplace evolves, we’ll continue to invest in our people and our platform to provide the kind of insight, innovation and solutions needed by brands and retailers today and in the future.”
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc


