AnalyticsIQ Amplifies Audience Reach Through Strategic Integration With Eyeota

03 May 2018

Partnership activates AnalyticsIQ’s Symphony Consumer Personas, providing marketers rich audience lifestyle profiles through the Eyeota Data Marketplace
Eyeota, the global leader in audience data, partners with AnalyticsIQ, a predictive analytics and consumer marketing innovator, to onboard and activate AnalyticsIQ’s Symphony Consumer Personas in the digital ecosystem, creating rich audience lifestyle profiles that are exclusively available through the Eyeota Data Marketplace.
With new Symphony segments, marketers and advertisers can improve their campaign efficacy by understanding consumers based on specific characteristics, interests, propensities and motivations that match their offering, increasing the chances of them becoming actual customers. Comprised of 10 overarching groups and 90 underlying types, Symphony Personas leverage more than 1,000 data attributes, from demographics to affluence details, on over 231 million unique individuals and 118 million households in the U.S.
Anna Brantley
“As the only data partner that provides heuristic onboarding for AnalyticsIQ, Eyeota delivers greater reach and scale for our Symphony lifestyle segments across the U.S.,” states Anna Brantley, Chief Revenue Officer at AnalyticsIQ. “We are thrilled to partner with Eyeota, an established and trusted leader in audience data, to enable more advertisers and marketers to understand consumers and target our unique lifestyle personas.”
Kevin Tan
Compliant with data privacy regulations globally, Eyeota Data Marketplace offers more than 3.5 billion unique profiles to help advertisers and marketers identify and target quality audiences for their campaigns. Leveraging Eyeota’s proprietary onboarding methodology, AnalyticsIQ’s offline data segments are linked to Eyeota’s online profiles and matched to common attributes, creating audience segments that marketers can also use to analyze and learn about existing and prospective customers.
“AnalyticsIQ provides valuable insights into consumer lifestyle and purchase habits. Its unique psychological approach offers accurate and powerful predictive data elements that brands can leverage to determine the motivations behind consumer purchases,” states Kevin Tan, CEO Eyeota. “We look forward to our partnership and helping brands improve their audience targeting and optimize their engagement strategies with the right consumers.”
 


