Cheetah Air, A Division Of Cheetah Software Systems Receives FAA Night Waiver Approval Extending Their Capability To A 24/7 Autonomous Drone Delivery Solution!

15 Mar 2018

Cheetah Air Takes Another Step Forward with 24/7 Drone Delivery Solution
While Cheetah Software Systems has constantly pushed the cutting edge of logistic technologies for the past 30 years, they have taken another step further today. Cheetah Air, a division of Cheetah Software Systems, is an advanced, scalable drone delivery solution that is capable of operating multiple aircraft beyond line of sight. Cheetah’s software not only plans delivery routes, but also predicts extremely accurate arrival times as it adapts, live and automatically, to changing operational conditions. These changes include air traffic mitigation, weather, customer cancellations, new stop-insertion, and package weight changes. In the past four years, Cheetah Air has enabled this solution to become both consistent and reliable while increasing the capabilities and compatibilities with other aircraft systems.
This allows Cheetah Air to deliver packages and services via drone 24 hours a day and further increases the capabilities to assist customers.
Recently, Cheetah Air has received approval from the Federal Aviation Administration to operate at night under Part 107 regulations. This allows Cheetah Air to deliver packages and services 24 hours a day and further increases the capabilities to assist customers.
An example of how this software will be utilized is the delivery of equipment and supplies for the medical field as an autonomous 24/7 solution. This allows medical professionals to get their much-needed supplies faster and at a reduced cost compared to truck deliveries.
One of Cheetah’s main goals is to provide deliveries in the shortest time possible to customers for the lowest operating cost. Using drones, this cost reduction is possible due to the minimal operational costs using drones. Drones operate on cheap, clean electricity, lowering environmental pollution and lowering operating costs. Further cost reduction is the result of the drone being fully autonomous, not requiring a driver for deliveries. They also operate at altitudes to which traffic concerns are mitigated. As a result, Cheetah now takes another step toward their goals by delivering an optimized drone solution capable of 24/7 operations.


