Microsoft, IBM, And Accenture Top The A-List In Enterprise Blockchain Index Based On CompassIntel.com Research

24 Apr 2018

Companies Innovating in Enterprise Blockchain Based On Compass Intelligence A-List Index Research
Five companies top the A-List in AI Chipset Index based on recently released research by Compass Intelligence, including Microsoft, IBM, Accenture, Amazon and Oracle. The A-List in Enterprise Blockchain Index includes companies providing products and services to support financial services, logistics, and hyperledgers for a variety of new cryptocurrencies, many of which are purpose-specific such as payments within the IoT ecosystem. These companies, among others, are leveraging blockchain technology to change the course of business and provide for a more secure process for a number of core business applications. Based on a proprietary research framework and model, these top companies scored roughly 75 to 85 points out of a total of 90 points per the index.
Microsoft tops the A-List in Enterprise Blockchain Index, followed by IBM, Accenture and Amazon (both with scores of 80), and Oracle. Rounding out the rest of the top 15 include companies such as Tencent, Dell, Baidu, HP, Fedex, Fidelity Investments, Overstock, Hyundai, DMG Blockchain Solutions, and Kodak. Microsoft recently announced news of using blockchain technology for storing and managing digital IDs (Identification), and more specifically using this through its own Microsoft Authenticator App.
“Enterprise Blockchain solutions will dramatically improve logistics and supply chains,” states Gerry Christensen, Senior Analyst and Advisor. “Key drivers include optimizing operations, streamlining access control, improving security of connected devices, and refining contract management.”
Top 15 in The CompassIntel A-List in Enterprise Blockchain Index include:
Microsoft – 82
IBM – 81
Accenture – 80
Amazon – 80
Oracle – 77
Tencent – 73
Dell – 72
Baidu – 67
HPE – 65
FedEx – 61
Fidelity Investments – 60
Overstock – 60
Hyundai – 58
DMG Blockchain Solutions – 57
Kodak – 50
The CompassIntel A-List Index is a research framework using economic indicators, vendor tracking analysis, firmographics, market metrics, quantitative tracking, and data analytics to provide a scoring and ranking system for vendors in the mobile, IoT, and emerging technologies markets. The CompassIntel A-List Index combines research, quantitative metrics analysis, and expert analyst due diligence.
Founded in 2005, CompassIntel.com is a market analytics and consulting firm specializing in metrics-driven market intelligence and insights for the mobile, IoT, and high-tech industries. Compass Intelligence provides executive insights, market sizing/forecasting and modeling, competitive analysis, strategic consulting, advisory services, trending analysis, and survey research services. Compass Intelligence helps guide strategic business decisions, and support in the success of our clients through delivering content engagement, go to market planning, competitive positioning, and strategic advisory.


