CRYPTO20 Passes $12 Million For Autonomous Crypto Index Fund

04 Jan 2018

Over 4,700 Contributors Are Part Of The Fund Which, Unlike Competitors, Is A Finished Product With Live Trading Tools
CRYPTO20 is continuing to gain momentum as it passes $12 million for its Cryptocurrency Index Fund. CRYPTO20 originally raised $5 million in an oversubscribed pre-sale and the public token sale is currently running with over $12 million invested. With two weeks left to run, the team behind CRYPTO20 is expecting to build even further and cross the $20 million mark in the coming week.
The fund’s token, C20, is a representation of an investor’s share of the fund, and the fund’s value is equal to the combined value of its assets. CRYPTO20, unlike many of the other offerings in the marketplace today, is a finished product and not a platform.
Actively managed funds consistently fail to beat the market index despite decades worth of data, billions of dollars and hundreds of analysts at their disposal. When they have, their fees dilute investor returns to less than if they had simply held the index.
Daniel Schwartzkopff
“We have known for a long time that the crypto world should benefit from the introduction of the most proven, practical, tried and tested investment vehicle - the index fund - and we are pleased to share this outlook with over 4,700 contributors.” – Daniel Schwartzkopff, CEO & Founder, CRYPTO20″ – Daniel Schwartzkopff, Founder & CEO, CRYPTO20
CRYPTO20 has released trading tools and insights that are generated live from the eight exchanges connected to the system via a simple, unified API. The trading tools are available in the fund investor portal and include information on slippage, the best price, and trading pair to acquire assets with and the volume by exchange.
Simple to use is one of CRYPTO20’s USPs. CRYPTO20 provides a way to track the performance of the crypto markets as a whole by holding a single crypto asset. Index funds have consistently beaten the average managed fund since their inception.


