Vade Secure Closes $12M, Advances Email Security With Artificial Intelligence

09 Jan 2018

Launches New Email Product for Office 365 to Protect Businesses from Ransomware and Phishing
 Vade Secure, a leader in predictive email defense, closed a $12 Million funding round to accelerate international growth and continue innovation. The deal was coordinated and led by ISAI and its Growth Equity Fund team. Vade Secure also announced a new email product: Vade Secure for Office 365. This product will protect Microsoft Office 365 users from phishing, malware, and ransomware.
This solution will fully integrate with Office 365 using the API and provide an additional layer of security specifically focused on blocking the 0.1 percent of email threats that have been tailored to slip past the defense technologies that other solutions utilize. To defend against these advanced threats, Vade Secure has developed predictive email defense, powered by artificial intelligence and supported by machine learning. Vade Secure analyzes two billion emails and makes 1.6 million blocking decisions per day, providing the most robust email defense on the market and leading in email security.
Georges Lotigier
“With this round of funding, we hope to accelerate the release of this new product and enable our partners to offer a new layer of security without disrupting the existing solution and cloud Infrastructure by providing a seamless integration with Microsoft Office 365,” stated Georges Lotigier, CEO of Vade Secure. “Our unique SaaS technology protects against polymorphic attacks that are primarily transmitted via email. It’s these types of ransomware and phishing attacks that, unfortunately, have increased in popularity and claimed many victims over the last few years.”
Vade Secure currently operates in 76 countries and protects 400 million mailboxes globally. With its latest round of funding, the company will increase its global footprint, particularly in North America and Japan and is expected to obtain one billion of protected users in the near future.
Additionally, entrepreneur Stephan Dietrich, vice president, Adobe Campaign has joined Vade Secure’s Board of Directors to support the company’s efforts to protect consumers from email scams and international expansion. Adobe Campaign enables marketers to send hyper-personalized, engaging emails based on customer knowledge and interactions.
“Email is one of the most prevalent attacks used by cybercriminals to breach enterprises and scam consumers, resulting in devastating consequences to finances, operations and brands’ reputations,” said Dietrich. “Vade Secure is instrumental in email protection and leads the industry in its efforts to predict email attacks before they happen. The company’s growth is exceptional and I look forward to assisting Vade Secure’s management team with its US and international expansion.”
Vade Secure increased revenue by more than 50 percent in 2016, a new record for the company. Vade Secure continues to grow in 2017 with a profitable SaaS business model currently focused primarily on cloud solutions for internet service providers (ISPs) and managed service providers (MSPs).


