RightMesh And SingularityNET To Explore AI Integration Into Mesh Networking SDK

21 Mar 2018

Expanding the mobile device resources available in emerging markets, RightMesh collaborates with SingularityNET to enable AI and machine learning solutions in mesh applications.
RightMesh will be integrating its SDK with the SingularityNET technology stack, creating more opportunities for developers to include AI and machine learning functionality in mesh applications.
RightMesh aims to improve global connectivity, especially in emerging markets that lack infrastructure provided by centralized Internet Service Providers (ISPs). By supporting developers in incorporating its mesh networking SDK into new and existing applications, RightMesh hopes to expand the mobile device resources accessible to those who currently lack sufficient connectivity to fully participate in the global economy. The integration with the SingularityNET technology stack will allow for the creation of applications that can deliver valuable AI and machine learning insights to users and communities who may not presently be able to benefit from such insights to date.
John Lyotier
“Given the increasing digitization of the global economy, connectivity has become an essential component of participation,” says RightMesh CEO, John Lyotier. “Unfortunately, almost 4 billion people remain unconnected and disenfranchised from opportunities for trade and communication as well as access to health, education, and financial resources that can drastically improve quality of life. By working with SingularityNET we aim to enrich the applications available to those who lack connectivity via centralized providers to include AI and ML enabled solutions.”
SingularityNET envisions a future wherein anyone can create, monetize, and employ AI. By collaborating with RightMesh, SingularityNET will be able to disseminate AI capabilities to a greater population, including to people who suffer from weak connectivity due to remote location, lack of infrastructure, or disruption due to a natural disaster or censorship from a repressive regime.
Ben Goertzel
SingularityNET CEO Dr. Ben Goertzel notes that, “Creating a democratic and decentralized information infrastructure requires a number of different complex systems to be assembled and integrated. RightMesh and SingularityNET comprise two critical pieces of this puzzle. RightMesh provides a decentralized, self-organizing Internet connectivity platform; SingularityNET provides a decentralized, self-organizing AI platform. Putting these together, one obtains a way for AI to learn from, and provide diverse services to, everyone on the planet in an incomparably flexible, efficient and robust way. It excites me tremendously to be alive at a time when the creation and integration of these sorts of platforms is reality rather than science fiction!”
The potential impact achieved by combining RightMesh’s mesh networking protocol with SingularityNET’s AI and ML tech stack is tremendous. One tangible use case is an AI and mesh-enabled application that tracks the spread of an infectious disease and warns individuals who may be at risk of contracting it. Another use case may be an application incorporating AI and ML to anticipate the likelihood of floods, storms, and other dangerous weather events affecting remote regions that lack Internet, TV, and other means of communication.


