SoftBank Robotics America To Kick Off Future Of Work Initiatives At Collision Conference In New Orleans

26 Apr 2018

The Company Will Highlight The Importance Of The Future Of Robotics, Particularly As It Relates To Education For Rising Generations And The Future Of Work
SoftBank Robotics America (SBRA) will have a presence at this year’s Collision Conference, April 30 – May 3, 2018 in New Orleans. The company will highlight the importance of the future of robotics, particularly as it relates to education for rising generations and the future of work.
SBRA executives will be available throughout the week to discuss the role technology and robotics will have on the future of work, and answer questions about SBRA’s business strategy as they bring Pepper deeper into the US market. Through greater access to technology, SBRA, its partners and other technology leaders have the opportunity to shape the innovators of tomorrow and Collision provides an excellent backdrop for these conversations.
Meetings with SBRA executives will be booked by appointment only. Please inquire ASAP.
WHO: SoftBank Robotics America
WHAT: The Collision Conference 2018
WHERE: Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, LA
ONSITE ENGAGEMENTS: Executive Panel – Facing Up To Advanced Robotic Capabilities: Social and humanoid robots used to be relegated to C3PO and other Star Wars-style works of fiction. But machines that interact with humans will soon create life-changing user experiences. This panel will dive into several key drivers of robotics that are improving by leaps and bounds in 2018, including consistent and accurate voice and face recognition.
When: May 2, 2018 at 3:05 – 3:25 PM CT
Where: TalkRobot Stage
Panelists:
Steve Carlin, Chief Strategy Officer at SoftBank Robotics
Doug Aley, Chief Executive Officer at Ever AI
Angelica Lim, Professor of Professional Practice in Computing Science, AI and Robotics, Simon Fraser University
Jason Abbruzzese, Panel Moderator & Senior Tech Editor at NBC News
Press Conference –  Following the “Facing Up To Advanced Robotic Capabilities” panel, media are invited to attend an open Q&A session with the panelists as well as hear more from SoftBank’s Pepper robot.
When: May 2, 2018 at 4:00 – 4:30 PM CT
Where: Media Village
SBRA Educational Student Workshops – In partnership with The Better Than Ezra Foundation, SBRA will lead morning robotics workshops with local New Orleans middle school children in an effort to expose a new generation to hard-to-access STEM resources and robotics education. During the workshops, students will have the opportunity to build their own Pepper experience and see their work come to life.
When: 9:30 am – 12:30 pm CT
Where: SoftBank Robotics Private Room at Ernest N. Morial Convention Center
Who:
Ursuline Academy: Wednesday, May 2, 2018
St. Charles Borromeo: Thursday, May 3, 2018
Startup Contest – Companies exhibiting on “Startup Row” at Collision submitted for the opportunity to utilize Pepper at their booths to better promote their businesses and engage Collision attendees. SBRA built customer experiences for the following winning startups, each of which will host Pepper at their respective booths throughout the week.
Startup Winners:
Babylon Micro-Farms
Tuesday, May 1, 2018
Booth Number: B101
Tengu
Wednesday, May 2, 2018
Booth Number: B101
Ticketlabel
Thursday, May 3, 2018
Booth Number: B101
Umbra
May 1, May 2, & May 3, 2018
Booth Number: G-108
 


