HoloGirlsVR.com To Pay Viewers In Vice Industry Token Cryptocurrency

11 Jun 2018

VIT’s latest partner, HoloGirlsVR, will pay for viewers’ attention and interaction in VIT tokens which can be used across VIT’s network
Vice Industry Token, Inc. (VIT), the decentralized blockchain platform and cryptographic token for the adult industry, today announced that the company has added HoloGirlsVR to its network of content providers that will be offering VIT to viewers for their attention and participation with online content.
Read More: Microdrones Participates In NVIDIA Jetson Developer Meetup At Embedded World 2018
Stuart Duncan
“HoloGirlsVR.com is the premier provider of virtual reality adult content with their proprietary NoSick™ Technology,” said Stuart Duncan, chief executive officer of Vice Industry Token, Inc. “As a cutting edge cryptocurrency company we are partnering with the best content providers in the industry to award viewers for their attention and engagement.”
Vice Industry Token is part of a new movement called the “attention economy.” The company’s blockchain is unique in that users are paid in VIT to consume content and interact with it by liking, sharing and commenting.  Users will get paid in VIT to watch videos and the tokens they earn can be used to watch premium content across VIT’s network.  The tokens can also be used toward subscriptions to paid sites.
Read More: Autonomous Vehicle Sensors Conference Comes To San Jose In June
Anna Lee
HoloGirlsVR.com is a product of HoloFim Productions, a full-service virtual reality production studio that also produces VR adult films.
“As the leading virtual reality adult site, we always have to be on the forefront of innovation,” said Anna Lee, president and executive producer of HoloFilm Productions.  “Our consumer base is the perfect target market for VIT because they are extremely tech savvy and already understand blockchain and cryptocurrency. It made sense for us to add VIT to HoloGirlsVR.com and it will make the site even more engaging.”
Read More: Kraken Joins NVIDIA Inception Program


