Pass The Baton….Please: Artificial Intelligence (AI) Platform To Revolutionize Commercial Real Estate Investment And Valuation

09 Jul 2018

From Private Placement Markets (PPM) To Online Public Offerings (OPO)
eVest Technology: Commercial real estate refuses to welcome modern technology. “Ancient”, analog laws have been deregulated and technology now offers opportunities one could only dream of 20 years ago.
The JOBS Act of 2012 deregulated the general solicitation laws to allow for massive marketing of securities to accredited investors. Why then, does a multi-trillion-dollar industry continue to operate with excel and HP 12C’s?
Pass the baton, please. Technology can be daunting, if not downright scary, for long-in-the-tooth real estate syndicators. Writing algorithms to gather data to generate predictive outcomes is like learning Latin. For most busy professionals, that is not going to happen. Our industry needs to understand technology is here to stay. Accept it or get left behind.
Follow Us
Self-driving cars, machine learning EKG’s, Siri, purchase predicting by Amazon and even Online Customer Support exists in today’s world, and yet, Private Placement Memorandums are still a standard in capital raising circles around the globe. Capital raisers continue to meet face-to-face with prospects, dialing for dollars is still customary and even monthly invoices and dividends are sent and received via US Post office. Unbelievable in a world with Netflix and Google.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections
Enter eVest Technology. Its 2018 goal is to introduce its Online Public Offering software to an entire industry still strapped to antiquated traditional capital raising and investor management tools. Why pay $15,000 for a PPM when it is no longer necessary? Why spend months dealing with attorneys, CPA’s and the SEC when capital raising via Reg D 506 (c) Title II allows for an inexpensive and expeditious marketing-to-funding platform. Why? Because CRE refuses to accept digital technology.
Time to pass the baton to the next generation that understands that we exist in a digital economy. The eVest Capital Raising & Investor Management software understands this and embraces digital technology. Sister company, RealtyeVest, has been in the crowdsourcing space since the beginning. It understands the technical intricacies and challenges to make it seamless and transparent. All this knowledge has been transferred to eVest and combined with the latest digital technology and Artificial Intelligence. The Features are truly cutting-edge. Not 5 years old but 5 months old.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections
eVest offers unique features not available anywhere else. High net-worth prospective investors are harvested exclusively for each client using internal algorithms. Its Core Intelligence tool generates market trends and tendencies for each client’s market. A “Valuation” tool is under development to offer clients an actual data-driven valuation of the real estate asset. There are financial modelling tools, back-office accounting features, custom CRM’s and much more. The software is fully automated and designed to facilitate marketing-to-funding seamlessly.
“MidSouth Multifamily was formed to capitalize on the huge emerging online offering market.  Integral to our strategy was the deployment of a cutting edge fintech platform to scale our business and manage our investor base.  EVest emerged as the clear winner for us after an exhaustive search and due diligence of the available platforms.  Whether it’s investor sourcing, deal marketing and management, or back-end administration you are looking for – eVest delivers.”
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance


