BYTON Announces Worldwide Growth With Executive Hires And Los Angeles Lab

04 Apr 2018

Global presence also highlighted with upcoming showcase at Beijing Motor Show
Following its launch at the 2018 Consumer Electronics Show, intelligent electric vehicle maker BYTON is expanding its global footprint with two key executive hires and the opening of a new Los Angeles facility, as well as broad exposure to the worldwide stage with the introduction of its Smart Intuitive Vehicle (SIV), the BYTON Concept, at the 2018 Beijing Motor Show.
Following its launch at the 2018 Consumer Electronics Show, intelligent electric vehicle maker BYTON is expanding its global footprint with two key executive hires and the opening of a new Los Angeles facility, as well as broad exposure to the worldwide stage with the introduction of its Smart Intuitive Vehicle (SIV), the BYTON Concept, at the 2018 Beijing Motor Show.
David Twohig, BYTON’s chief automotive engineer
The opening of BYTON’s L.A. Future Lab showcases the company’s continued commitment to superior UI/UX . BYTON Concept, which will be showcased at the Beijing Motor Show, includes state-of-the-art design, such as its industry-first Shared Experience Display (SED).
Global Growth: 
Today, BYTON added two new executives to its senior management team: Chad Harrison, who joins the company as its vice president of product-line management, and David Twohig, who is now BYTON’s chief automotive engineer. Harrison is a 22-year veteran of the automotive industry and formerly Honda R&D America’s chief automotive engineer. Twohig is a highly-respected engineer who most recently led the development of the Alpine A110 as Chief Engineer at Alpine and Head of Vehicle Engineering at Renault Sport.
Carsten Breitfeld
BYTON also announced the expansion of its U.S. footprint following the opening of its North American headquarters in Silicon Valley in December 2017, which has grown to almost 300 employees. While the Silicon Valley office will continue to focus on developing the technology for the Smart Intuitive Vehicle at its launch in Q4 2019, the company’s new L.A. Future Lab will focus on developing the latest forward-thinking user experiences and advanced concepts to define the future of driving and ride-sharing. BYTON already boasts one of the most unique UI/UX designs in the automotive world, as the BYTON Concept includes state-of-the-art design such as its industry-first Shared Experience Display (SED), gesture controls, and a Driver Tablet installed in the steering wheel console. Located in a global hub for automotive design and innovation, BYTON’s newest facility is charged with ensuring that BYTON remains a leader in intelligent and intuitive UX design.
“Revolutionizing the user experience in the car is at the core of BYTON. We’re working very hard to make sure your BYTON vehicle is a next-generation smart device – a smartphone on wheels,” said Dr. Carsten Breitfeld, CEO and Co-Founder, BYTON. “Our L.A. Future Lab will push that idea to the bleeding edge of what’s possible, and we’re already excited for what we will be able to share in the future.”


