Why Rising Number Of Industries Are Embracing Blockchain Technology Well Beyond Cryptocurrencies

17 Feb 2018

Blockchain technology has applicability to many business areas including government, healthcare, education, manufacturing, energy and supply chain. Innovative Technology Companies continue to identify new uses for blockchain to deploy the technology in various industries. Blockchain technology enables developers to build software applications that deploy decentralized, immutable double-ledgers on networks that boast improved speed, security, and traceability to existing solutions. Disrupting startups and corporate behemoths will unleash a new wave of digital applications, products, and monetary infrastructure utilizing blockchain technology independent of cryptocurrencies.  According to a recent report from Netscribes Inc., the global blockchain technology market is expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 42.8%, to reach USD 13.96 billion by 2022. Active Companies in the markets this week include: Tapinator, Inc. (OTC: TAPM), Global Blockchain Technologies Corp. (OTC: BLKCF) (TSX-V: BLOC), Marathon Patent Group Inc. (NASDAQ: MARA), Riot Blockchain Inc. (NASDAQ: RIOT), MGT Capital Investments Inc.(OTC: MGTI).
Tapinator, Inc.(OTCQB: TAPM) BREAKING NEWS: Tapinator, a leading developer and publisher of mobile games and decentralized apps (DApps) on the iOS, Google Play, Amazon, and Ethereum platforms, today announces that it will soon be releasing BitPainting, a crypto-collectibles application for the global art market. A beta release of the platform is scheduled for this coming April, and interested collectors may sign up for Beta Access at BitPainting.com.
Tapinator’s announcement is being made in conjunction with the Company’s participation at ETH Denver , a leading blockchain conference taking place on February 16th-18th in Denver Colorado. Ilya Nikolayev, CEO of Tapinator, will be participating on a conference panel entitled “Art and Games on the Blockchain.”Read this and more news for Tapinator at: http://www.marketnewsupdates.com/news/tapm.html
“We are very excited to announce the upcoming launch of BitPainting, a new digital platform for collecting iconic art on the blockchain,” said Mr. Nikolayev. “The application is built on the Ethereum Platform and will rely on our proprietary smARTTM Contracts. We believe the $45 billion art market is ripe for disruption by blockchain technology through crypto-collectibles which will drive art sales via digital scarcity and will democratize fine art investment.
We believe Tapinator is well positioned to become a disruptor of the global art market through the BitPainting platform. We are excited to provide the market with further detail regarding the application as we get closer to our launch date,” concluded Nikolayev


