Cubic Executive Joins UK Prime Minister Theresa May At Roundtable Discussion On Future Of Technology Investment

16 Jun 2018

Meeting At No. 10 Downing Street Focused On Strengthening United Kingdom’s Position As A World-Leading Destination For Technology Investors And Entrepreneurs
Cubic Corporation announced its Cubic Transportation Systems (CTS) business division participated in a roundtable discussion with United Kingdom Prime Minister Theresa May focusing on strengthening the United Kingdom’s position as a world-leading destination for technology investment.
The roundtable, which took place at No. 10 Downing Street, was attended by Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond; Secretary of State for International Trade Liam Fox; Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Matthew Hancock; as well as leading figures from the tech industry.
Cubic was one of 12 companies invited to participate in this exclusive event, which forms part of London Tech Week, a celebration of London’s vibrant technology scene, taking place from June 11-17 and featuring a range of events convening global leaders from technology and business.
Read More: Interview With Kalin Stoyanchev, Head Of Blockchain + RNDR Project Lead
Roger Crow
Representing Cubic was Roger Crow, executive vice president and managing director of Europe, CTS. Crow spoke about the United Kingdom’s unique tech environment, which attracts top investors and talent from around the world, the ways to build on that strength and how to capitalize on emerging opportunities in the sector.
“Cubic is a long-time investor in the United Kingdom. Both CTS and our defense business, Cubic Global Defense, have invested heavily in the country,” said Crow. “CTS has substantially invested in research and development in the region and many of our strategic investments are located here – including our Global Operations Center in the North East of England and our Global Innovation Centre in London.”
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?
Cubic’s public transit technologies including Oyster and contactless ticketing are exported around the world through a licensing agreement with Transport for London to places such as Miami, New York and Boston.
“We are excited about the future of transportation in the United Kingdom and look forward to continue investing in our U.K. operations, allowing us to bring innovation to customers worldwide,” said Crow.


