Game-changers: 10 Virtual Reality Gaming Companies To Look Out For

12 May 2018

The Global Virtual Reality (VR) In Gaming Market Is Going Places. It Is Expected To Reach $45.09 Billion By 2025, And The Biggest Task Of All – Getting Gamers To Get Off The Couch
According to a new report by Grand View Research, Inc the increasing competitiveness among key players such as Microsoft Corp., Sony Corp., and Nintendo Co. Ltd. to launch VR-compatible consoles has triggered industry growth.
Here’s a list of the key players who are making a mark in the virtual reality gaming space;
(1) Owlchemy Labs
Owlchemy Labs is a creative studio with a passion for polished and unique VR experiences and games. Founded in 2010 and based out of Austin, TX, we believe that interaction and using your hands is what truly makes virtual reality the most incredible place to build unique content that blows players minds. We love building experiences oozing with style and full to the brim with our unique brand of humor. There’s good news for Rick and Morty fans here; in a game called Virtual Rick-ality, players will take on the role of a fully disposable Morty clone brought to life to carry out arbitrary tasks for Rick.
(2) Improbable
Improbable is a British technology company that focuses on large-scale simulations in the cloud, enabling virtual worlds of unprecedented scale and complexity. SpatialOS is a cloud-based platform for creating games that go beyond the design limitations of traditional server architectures. You build your game with our SDKs, familiar engines and your own workflows. Our SpatialOS technology then stitches together many game engines and servers to create rich, persistent online worlds. SpatialOS also provides you with the tools and infrastructure to quickly deploy your game at scale – you don’t need to worry about running your game’s servers, and can focus on finding the fun.
Read More: Changing Face Of Gaming Debunks Long Held Stereotypes
(3) SVRVIVE Studios AB
One of Europe’s leading virtual reality games studio based in Stockholm, working and creating games of the future, their creation – The Deus Helix is a challenging adventure puzzle, inspired by escape rooms and mystery game classics, such as Myst. In the game, the player is abducted from their earthly life and obliged to join an alien agent workforce. Under the direction of the player’s commander and guide Nikodemus Salinger, the newly recruited Agent (player) is sent to different parts of the universe in order to recover the missing parts of the Deus Helix.
The game is celebrated as one of the longest VR game experiences to date (average 5 hours, but only if you’re good).
  (4) Unity Technologies
Unity plays an important part in a booming global games market. More games are made with Unity than with any other game technology. More players play games made with Unity, and more developers rely on our tools and services to drive their business.
Last year, Universal Games and Unity Technologies announce an unprecedented partnership to launch the Universal GameDev Challenge, sponsored by Intel and Microsoft. Unity developers from around the world are invited to submit a game design document and pitch video with the goal of being chosen to build a PC game leveraging one of five Universal owned intellectual properties: Back to the Future™, Jaws™, Battlestar Galactica™, DreamWorks Voltron Legendary Defender™ and Turok. The winner and runner-up will take home a combined $250,000 cash prize along with a consulting contract with Microsoft, Unity and Universal.
Read More: Noitom Travels MuseumExpo With The Alice Space Lunar Mission Virtual Reality Experience
(5) Luden.io
Luden.io was initially started as an R&D group at Nival. Nival’s track record includes best-selling PC strategy games such as Blitzkrieg, Heroes of Might and Magic V, Silent Storm and Etherlords. Free VR games, InMind and InCell, were published in 2015 for all VR platforms. In 2016 they introduced InMind 2 exclusively for Google Daydream. Their next game, VRobot, was just an experiment, but the growing community made them release it as a game on Steam in 2017 and PlayStation VR in 2018. ARrived, studio’s first AR game, was a launch title for Apple’s ARKit in 2017.
(6) Force Field
Formerly Vanguard Games, this is an independent studio founded in 2015. It has since developed high-end content for different VR headsets like HTC Vive, Oculus Rift, Playstation VR and mobile VR. By working closely with leading hardware manufacturers at an early stage in the lifecycle of VR, Force Field established itself as an experienced studio that can get the most out of new hardware innovations. This already resulted in several major VR projects. Many more titles are in development, so expect to hear more announcements on these projects becoming a reality very soon.
As of 2017, Force Field has ventured out into the market for of out-of-home / location based VR and AR entertainment.
  (7) Ubisoft
Ubisoft is a $4 Billion market cap company that is publicly traded on Euronext and also as an ADR on the over-the-counter market. This French game publisher has connected with gamers around the world by building franchises around Prince of Persia, Assassin’s Creed, Far Cry, Watchdogs, Just Dance, Rabbids and the many Tom Clancy games. Two of the biggest franchises coming together. Ubisoft recently announced that Star Trek: Bridge Crew, its (primarily) virtual reality recreation of the classic sci-fi television show, will be getting a Next Generation themed expansion for PlayStation 4 and PC later this year. Star Trek: Bridge Crew – The Next Generation, to give the expansion its full and thoroughly unsurprising name, will be available for PSVR, Vive, and Oculus Rift – and, as of December last year, will also work without VR if you don’t have the appropriate kit.
  (8) OZWE
OZWE works on in partnership with Oculus Studios to create interactive experiences within Virtual Reality. It is known to create disruptive gaming interfaces that lay the foundations of new interactive systems and patterns within virtual reality. OZWE is a major player in the growing business of VR technologies, aiming to serve its demands and lead by example.
At OZWE the research effort focuses on the invention of the next revolutionary VR gaming experience: revolutionizing the way one interacts, physically and emotionally, with breathing and evolving virtual universes.
Read More: Epic Games Announces An Open Beta Of Unreal Studio
(9) Resolution Games
Earlier this month, alongside the US availability of the Lenovo Mirage Solo, the world’s first standalone Daydream VR headset, Resolution Games announced the availability of three of its highly rated virtual reality (VR) games, Bait!, Wonderglade and Narrows for the Lenovo Mirage Solo. The games take full advantage of the new headset’s inherent features, including integration of WorldSense™ motion-tracking, six degrees of freedom and more. Resolution Games is a VR and AR games studio creating accessible, fun games that everyone can enjoy – pushing the limits of the emerging visual computing space. Their VR fishing game, Bait!, is known as one of the most popular VR titles to date with more than 2 million downloads. The studio is composed of game industry veterans, serial entrepreneurs and thought leaders with a proven track record of widely acclaimed success spanning across mass market and AAA games, free-to-play games, hardware and more. Resolution Games is privately held and based in Stockholm, Sweden.
  (10) CRYTEK
Founded by brothers Avni, Cevat, and Faruk Yerli in 1999, Crytek has studios in Frankfurt am Main (Germany), Kiev (Ukraine) and Istanbul (Turkey). With a focus on technical innovation and a reputation for setting the industry standard for graphics, Crytek has created multiple award-winning titles, including the original Far Cry, the Crysis series, Ryse: Son of Rome, Warface, The Climb, and Robinson: The Journey.
Every Crytek title is powered by CRYENGINE, a comprehensive game development solution available on a Pay What You Want business model for anyone who wants to bring their creative vision to life and deliver world-class gaming experiences for PC, consoles, and VR, no matter the budget or team size.
Read More: 10 Ways Companies Are Changing The Way You Game


