PowerPost Launches The First Virtual Assistant For Content Marketers

13 Mar 2018

PowerIQ Is A Unique Content Intelligence Technology That Takes The Guesswork Out Of Content Marketing
PowerPost, a leading content marketing platform, has today announced the launch of PowerIQ Virtual Assistant, a unique content intelligence technology that takes the guesswork out of content marketing. PowerIQ provides brand marketers access to real-time intelligence, competitive insights and identifies the most successful content produced by competitors and industry influencers.
Dan Curran
“PowerIQ is a cross between a virtual research assistant and a content coach. For the first time, brands will now be able to identify relevant content topics on-demand, create hyper-targeted campaigns and have access to expert brand journalists—all from a single platform,” says Dan Curran, President of PowerPost. “PowerIQ is the first ever virtual marketing assistant powered by AI.”
With PowerIQ, brands can now tailor content topics more precisely to attract consumer attention. Data-driven editorial decisions are essential to brand success. Early client feedback has demonstrated an increase in social engagement by more than 50 percent by leveraging PowerIQ.
PowerPost’s launch of PowerIQ represents a crucial milestone towards leveraging predictive technology and artificial intelligence techniques to help create fully-optimized branded content. According to Mike Kaput, Director of the Marketing Artificial Intelligence Institute, “Artificial intelligence is transforming how marketers plan, produce, personalize, promote and perform. Using AI in content marketing is one of the biggest opportunities for marketers to move the needle in a meaningful way, starting today.”
Nearly 100 PowerPost clients, representing verticals such as insurance, finance and CPG are currently leveraging PowerIQ to build successful content programs and outperform their competition.  
About PowerPost: PowerPost provides brand marketers with access to three intelligent content marketing solutions. PowerIQ delivers access to real-time intelligence to create surgically-precise branded content. PowerPublish helps brand marketers automate content curation and distribution. PowerOnDemand gives content creators real-time access to dedicated Brand Journalists, who can help craft branded content according to the highest editorial standards. Offices in Chicago and St. Louis.


