Vectra Announces Record-Breaking Year With 181% Revenue Growth, Enhancements To AI Platform, And Industry Recognition

16 Feb 2018

Vectra earns five Cybersecurity Excellence Awards, including the Gold awards for Security Monitoring and Security Analytics categories
Vectra, the leader in automating the hunt for in-progress cyberattacks, today announced that 2017 was another record-breaking year for the company, with significant growth in revenue, enhancements to its Cognito threat detection and response platform and industry recognition. Vectra was also positioned by Gartner, Inc. in the Visionaries quadrant in its 2018 Magic Quadrant for Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems¹. We believe these milestones demonstrate the company’s achievements and continued leadership in delivering artificial intelligence (AI)-based cybersecurity solutions to enterprises transforming their security operations.
The Cognito platform enables enterprises to detect and respond to cyberattacks in real time. Cognito uses AI to perform non-stop, automated threat hunting with always-learning behavioral models to quickly and efficiently find hidden and unknown attackers before they do damage. Cognito provides full visibility into cyberattacker behaviors from cloud and data center workloads to user and internet-of-things devices, leaving attackers with nowhere to hide. The latest enhancements to the solution include:
New detections driven by customer red-team exercises
Detections based on threat intel/IoCs
Improved collaboration to speed threat investigations
Addition of log analysis to increase coverage and context
Hitesh Sheth
“Vectra had a banner year in 2017,” said Hitesh Sheth, president and CEO of Vectra. “Significant customer growth and noteworthy enhancements to the Cognito platform helped our global customers act faster to stop hidden cyberthreats.
“These results demonstrate yet again that Vectra is ahead of the curve and our platform is leading the pack in enabling enterprises to tackle cybersecurity,” Sheth added. “Cognito is transforming cybersecurity using AI and dramatically improving enterprise security operations, while enabling us to earn customer business 90% of the time in competitive situations.”
2017 highlights
In 2017, Vectra revenue grew 181% over 2016. The company also grew its enterprise customer base by 67% across key verticals, including financial services, retail, automotive, manufacturing and healthcare industries. Over the past 12 months, major enhancements and drivers to the Vectra business have included:
Announced the ability for its customers to integrate threat intelligence and indicator-of-compromise (IoC) feeds into its Cognito platform to further improve their threat detection coverage.
Introduced Attack Campaigns to further automate threat hunting by exposing the relationships between threat detections on separate workloads and devices to understand the activity and scope of attack campaigns.
Announced the integration of network-based cyberattack detection with Carbon Black Cb Response to detect and isolate active threats in enterprise networks with unprecedented speed and precision.
Issued three U.S. patents, numbers 9565208, 9602533 and 9628512, for advanced cybersecurity analytics capabilities automated by AI. These patents, in addition to patents 9237164 and 9407647 issued in 2016, demonstrate the continued effectiveness of security research and data science collaborating to enhance visibility into attacker behaviors.
Industry recognition
For the first time, Vectra was positioned by Gartner, Inc. in the Visionaries quadrant of its 2018 Magic Quadrant for Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems report. Click here to download a complimentary copy of the Magic Quadrant.
The Cognito platform was recognized as a Gold Winner by the 2018 Cybersecurity Excellence Awards in the Security Analytics and Security Monitoring categories. Vectra also earned the Silver award in Best Cybersecurity Company and Network Security categories, along with a Bronze award for the Advanced Persistent Threat Protection category.
For more information about Vectra and the Cognito platform, please visit https://vectra.ai/.
¹Gartner, Inc., Magic Quadrant for Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems, Craig Lawson, Claudio Neiva, January 10, 2018.
Gartner Disclaimer
Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted in its research publications, and does not advise technology users to select only those vendors with the highest ratings or other designation. Gartner research publications consist of the opinions of Gartner’s research organization and should not be construed as statements of fact. Gartner disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this research, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.


