CenTrak Introduces IRUS™ – The First Hybrid Ultrasound-Gen2IR™ Internet Of Things (IoT) Location And Sensing Offering

02 Mar 2018

The combination of Advanced Ultrasound and Second Generation Infrared (Gen2IR™) delivers industry leading performance for today’s forward-thinking healthcare facilities
CenTrak, the 2017 and 2018 KLAS Research Category Leader for Real-Time Location Systems (RTLS), announced today the addition of IRUS™ hybrid locating technology to its Internet of Things (IoT) location and sensing offering.
IRUS™ was specifically developed for use cases requiring Clinical-Grade Locating™ in open spaces, such as infusion areas, preoperative and post-anesthesia care units, and emergency departments. IRUS supplements an already diverse Enterprise Location Services platform, and brings increased flexibility with highly accurate sub-room location segmentation, at update speeds measured in seconds. The combination of technologies drives the most demanding location-enabled clinical solutions, including: hand hygiene monitoring, rounding compliance, contact tracing and nurse call automation.
The patented blend of Gen2IR™ and Advanced Ultrasound provides the  accuracy and speed necessary for automating clinical workflow and improving patient care. IRUS™ reduces total cost of ownership, requiring less infrastructure compared to legacy systems. The synthesis of the technologies also overcomes interference challenges experienced using ultrasound locating in buildings with commercial lighting control systems.
Ari Naim
IRUS is interoperable with CenTrak’s extensive line of waterproof tags, including the 31-day patient tag designed without seams, screw holes, or crevices for easy sterilization. IRUS™ infrastructure may be wired or battery-powered with a 5-year battery guarantee and are supervised and configurable using Connect™, CenTrak’s configuration, system-health monitoring and advanced battery management platform. The technology can be deployed in conjunction with other native CenTrak technologies including Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), Wi-Fi, Low Frequency (LF), active UHF and passive RFID.
“The development of IRUS™ was driven by CenTrak’s continued commitment to transform patient care using the most advanced Internet of Things (IoT) technologies,” said Ari Naim, President and CEO of CenTrak.  “We continue to invest significantly in R&D to expand our breadth of supported location and sensory technology, ensuring CenTrak meets the industry’s ongoing challenge to improve the patient experience.”


