Volume, The AI Agency, Announces The Success Of Its Latest Commercial Conversational AI Platform

30 Dec 2017

Artesian Solutions’ Cap, Arti, Generates Enormous Uptick in Engagement Opportunities
Volume, the AI Agency and Gartner-recognised leader in the development of Conversational AI Platforms (CAPs), is delighted to announce the success of its latest commercial CAP, in partnership with Artesian Solutions.
Arti is a CAP that enables intuitive customer interaction in a relatively human-like way – answering questions about Artesian’s capabilities and providing expertise in real time.
CAPs, which are also known as smart chatbots, enhance user and customer experiences at lower operating costs. With the global chatbot market expected to reach $1.25 billion by 2025, and with 45% of customers preferring chatbots as their point of contact for customer-service inquiries, Volume is bringing the power of CAPs to businesses across marketing, payments and processing, and customer service.
Arti is a CAP that enables intuitive customer interaction in a relatively human-like way – answering questions about Artesian’s capabilities and providing expertise in real time. It was developed to help promote Artesian’s Art of the Possible campaign – raising awareness of how Artesian is harnessing the true power of AI to open new opportunities for relationship managers, and sales and marketing teams.
Since launching in October 2017, smart-chatbot Arti has been viewed more than 2,500 times. It’s been involved in nearly 1,500 conversations with more than 1,500 unique visitors from Artesian’s key customer verticals – including banking and financial services, retail, tech, insurance and professional services sectors. To date, it has answered in excess of 3,500 questions.
Chris Sykes
Speaking about the success of Arti, Chris Sykes, Volume’s CEO and Head of AI & Robotics, commented: “We were one of the first technology-agnostic CAP developers in the UK, originally replacing our own traditional website with a smart chatbot platform. We’re delighted that Artesian has given us the opportunity to take what we have learned and apply it to the commercial world, and boy, has it delivered. Arti provides Artesian’s prospective customers with a more personal and natural way of interacting – taking customer experience to a whole new level.”
Stuart Newton
He continues:”More and more businesses are recognizing the true potential of CAPs. Working together, Volume and Artesian are trailblazers for other organizations wanting to open the door to new and exciting AI-powered opportunities.” Stuart Newton, Artesian’s Director of Marketing, added:
“Arti was born out of a collaborative relationship between Artesian and Volume as we worked on a wider campaign focused on the benefits of our own AI functionality, and we could not be delighted with the results. It has been well received by our customers, prospects, and partners, who continue to improve Arti’s cognitive ability and effectiveness by asking it questions about Artesian’s service.”


