AppRiver Lands On Top 501 Global Managed Service Providers List By Channel Futures

10 Jul 2018

11th Annual MSP 501 Identifies World’s Most Forward-Thinking MSPs & Leading Trends in Managed Services
AppRiver, a leading provider of cloud cybersecurity and productivity solutions, ranks 16th among the world’s most strategic and innovative managed service providers (MSPs), according to Channel Futures 11th-annual MSP 501 Worldwide Company Rankings.
The MSP 501 is the first, largest and most comprehensive ranking of managed service providers, with a record number from across the globe competing this year.
Read More: How “System Mindfulness” is changing the FMCG Industry
Michael Murdoch
“AppRiver’s advanced security platform currently protects more than 60,000 corporate customers from phishing attempts, ransomware attacks, conversation hijacking, and other threats,” said AppRiver CEO Michael Murdoch. “This recognition speaks to both the quality of our solutions and to the innovative, dedicated team behind them.”
AppRiver provides email security, web-based malware protection, email encryption, secure archiving, and email continuity solutions. All of its security services are designed to work seamlessly with Office 365 and Microsoft 365, both of which are also offered by the company.
Read More: Interview With Dorian Selz, Co-Founder & CEO, Squirro
According to Channel Futures, MSPs were ranked according to their unique methodology, which recognizes that not all revenue streams are created equal. Revenue figures were weighted according to how well the applicant’s business strategy anticipates trends in the fast-evolving channel ecosystem.
“This year’s applicant pool was the largest and most diverse in the history of the survey, and our winners reflect the health and progressivity of the managed services market,” says Kris Blackmon, Channel Futures content director and editor of the MSP 501. “They’re growing their revenue, expanding their customer influence and exploring new technology that will propel them for years to come.”
The full MSP 501 report, available this fall, will be based on applicant responses, interviews and historical data to identify business and technology trends in the IT channel.
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?


