AdColony Announces Full Compatibility With Integral Ad Science, DoubleVerify And MOAT

15 Feb 2018

New Integrations Make AdColony the First In-App Video Marketplace to Integrate with all Leading Ad Quality Measurement Partners
AdColony, the ad quality video marketplace, today announced that the company is fully compatible with all major viewability measurement partners for both programmatic and managed service campaigns. AdColony is the first in-app video marketplace to partner with Integral Ad Science (IAS), MOAT and DoubleVerify, providing a range of options that will give AdColony customers the flexibility to work with the ad quality measurement vendor of their choice.
Unlike online or mobile web solutions, which can integrate viewability partners with a simple tag, the in-app environment requires complex technology integrations at the SDK level. The integration challenges have led to a lack of adoption for mobile in-app advertising measurement solutions. Now for the first time, marketers who value transparency have a reach platform that is fully measurable with all major partners.
Şekip Can Gökalp
“User-initiated in-app video is proving to be the most effective ad format in digital media, and we’ve seen that compared to mobile web, the in-app experience is more user friendly and brings better results. However, the lack of transparency has held the space back,” said Şekip Can Gökalp, EVP, exchange at AdColony. “We want to make in-app advertising 100 percent transparent, and when marketers can compare in-app to other formats in a measurable way, we are confident that they will continue to shift spend into the space.”
According to a 2017 Credit Suisse survey of marketing professionals responsible for a combined spend of $21 billion, nearly a third of respondents claimed viewability was their number one concern in digital advertising. This figure was over a 50 percent increase from a similar study done in 2016. Leading brands like Procter & Gamble have also gone on record claiming they believe that 20 to 30 percent of media spend is wasted due to a lack viewability and transparency.
AdColony is dedicated to solving this issue, and since integrating with MOAT in 2016, the company has delivered results over 100 percent higher than benchmarks in multiple categories. Specific highlights include:


