Microsoft ScaleUp Chooses Starmind For Its Technological Innovations In AI

08 Mar 2018

Microsoft Will Provide $500 Million Worldwide For The Next Two Years To Help Founders Expand
Starmind, the leading technology to expand human ingenuity by applying neuroscientific principles to AI, today announced that it has been chosen by Microsoft ScaleUp to participate in the prestigious four-month program for technology start-ups.
Starmind joins nine other innovative companies from around the world as they work with experienced coaches at Microsoft and continuing to develop their growth strategy. Microsoft will provide $500 million worldwide for the next two years to help founders expand through co-selling and access to Microsoft’s international sales and partner network and the Azure cloud platform.
Led by a jury of Microsoft Executives and Venture Capitalists (VCs), ScaleUp’s focus is on the technological scaling of start-up solutions, especially with the aid of the Microsoft Azure cloud platform. The program is represented at eight locations worldwide: Bangalore, Beijing, London, Seattle, Shanghai, Sydney, Tel Aviv and Berlin.
Pascal Kaufmann
“Microsoft has attracted some of the brightest minds in the world to develop products and technology virtually everyone uses. Their highlighting and recognizing our work in AI is a strong token of acknowledgement, and one I am proud to share with the entire Starmind team”, said Pascal Kaufmann, Founder of Starmind. “We are looking forward to working with and learning from some of the most experienced technology and business development specialists at Microsoft. This will ultimately add more value for our clients, team, and stakeholders.”
Iskender Dirik
“The artificial intelligences of the participating start-ups, such as Starmind, simplify administrative tasks, enrich decision-making bases with meaningful insights and ensure better knowledge transfer and exchange within the company,” said Iskender Dirik , Managing Director of Microsoft ScaleUp Berlin. “They make work across sectors more efficient and show the potential of the human-machine team.”
The other companies included in ScaleUp are:
1PlusX, Coureon Logistics, Jelastic, Nextail, Opinary, PhraseApp, SMACC, speexx, and Webdata Solutions.
Microsoft is the leading platform and productivity company for the mobile-first, cloud-first world, and its mission is to empower every person and every organization on the planet to achieve more.
Microsoft ScaleUp (formerly Microsoft Accelerators) is an immersive global program that offers late-stage and series A startups who have the greatest propensity to take advantage of Microsoft’s growth programs, such as co-marketing and co-selling opportunities, hone their infrastructure and build their businesses.
Starmind applies neuroscientific principles to AI, allowing its platform to understand people in a uniquely human way. Based on self-learning algorithms, Starmind is able to identify organizational experts, on any subject matter, and connect them with the employees who need access to previously undocumented company knowledge. Founded by Pascal Kaufmann and Marc Vontobel in 2010, companies worldwide, such as; J. Walter Thompson Worldwide, Telefónica Deutschland, and Swiss Re have incorporated the technology as part of their digital transformation strategy. Use of Starmind has led to increases in workplace efficiencies, decreases in redundancies, and an answer rate of 95%.


