Ayehu Updates ServiceNow Integration With Kingston Version

04 May 2018

Demonstrating Intelligent Automation for ITSM at Knowledge18
Ayehu, leading provider of an automation and orchestration platform powered by AI, today announced that it will demonstrate its latest integration with ServiceNow Kingston version at Knowledge18 Conference being held May 7-10, 2018 in Las Vegas.
As an established certified ServiceNow partner, Ayehu adheres to best practices when integrating and implementing its software platform with ServiceNow. Live demonstrations in Ayehu’s booth number 1529 will show the significant ITSM workflow productivity and efficiency improvements that result from the integration of Ayehu’s platform with ServiceNow.
Brian Boeggeman
“Knowledge18 is an ideal opportunity for showcasing the benefits of automation powered by AI as, more than ever, enterprises are eager to understand how Ayehu’s automation platform can help solve time and resource constraints in IT and security operations,” said Brian Boeggeman, vice president of alliances and partnerships, Ayehu. “We have had a long and successful history with ServiceNow and our latest version of the integrated solution dramatically improves results, allowing IT teams to automate ticket resolutions and routine service desk tasks.”
Ayehu’s powerful yet simple to use intelligent IT Automation and Orchestration Platform provides ready to use, closed-loop workflow templates that extend ServiceNow’s ITSM capabilities. With Ayehu, IT operations teams can eliminate end-users’ service desk calls, manual service desk tasks and help to remediate ticket issues faster. The platform helps organizations accelerate incident response and mean time to resolution (MTTR), and maintain greater control over IT infrastructure.
Ayehu’s integration with ServiceNow provides users with the ability to:
Leverage an intelligent conversation bot for end-user self-service capabilities
Automatically create, update, and close tickets and query configuration items in ServiceNow
Dramatically reduce alert storms and false alerts
Bridge heterogeneous platforms through unified workflows
Accelerate the reporting, escalation, and resolution of incidents
Ayehu’s next-generation IT Automation and Orchestration Platform is available at the ServiceNow Store.
Named by Gartner as a Cool Vendor, Ayehu’s IT Automation and Orchestration Platform powered by AI is a force multiplier for IT and security operations, helping enterprises save time on manual and repetitive tasks, accelerate mean time to resolution, and maintain greater control over IT infrastructure. Trusted by major enterprises and leading technology solution and service partners, Ayehu supports thousands of automated processes across the globe.
Read More: Interview With Ram Menon, Founder And CEO, Avaamo


