Adobe Names David A Ricks To Its Board Of Directors

16 Apr 2018

Ricks currently serves as Chief Executive Officer of Eli Lilly
Adobe today announced the appointment of David “Dave” A. Ricks to its board of directors, effective April 12, 2018. The addition of Ricks expands Adobe’s board of directors from 10 to 11 members.
Ricks currently serves as Chief Executive Officer of Eli Lilly and Company and became chairman of the Eli Lilly and Company board of directors in June 2017. Prior to January 2017, Ricks served as president of Lilly Bio-Medicines. From 2009 to 2012, he served as president of Lilly USA, the company’s largest affiliate. Ricks served as president and general manager of Lilly China, operating in one of the world’s fastest-growing emerging markets, from 2008 to 2009. He was general manager of Lilly Canada from 2005 to 2008, after roles as director of Pharmaceutical Marketing and National Sales director in Canada. Ricks joined Eli Lilly and Company in 1996 as a business development associate and held several management roles in U.S. marketing and sales before moving to Lilly Canada. He holds a Bachelor of Science from Purdue University and an M.B.A. from Indiana University.
Shantanu Narayen
“We are thrilled to welcome Dave to the Adobe board. We expect to benefit greatly from his experience and counsel as we seek to continue Adobe’s momentum and to execute on our strategy to empower people to create and transform how businesses compete,” said Shantanu Narayen, chairman, president and CEO, Adobe.
Adobe is changing the world through digital experiences.
Recently, ahead of the 2018 NAB Show, Adobe today announced a major update in Adobe Creative Cloud, giving video professionals new tools to automate and expedite time-consuming production tasks without sacrificing creative control. Available today, the updates include powerful new capabilities for refining color, creating graphics and crafting audio, along with enhanced VR tools, improved collaboration, integration with Adobe Stock and advanced artificial intelligence powered by Adobe Sensei.


