Aeon Ads Could Change The Way Companies Advertise Online

06 Mar 2018

Big data is starting to revolutionize advertising in a way that has outpaced traditional media. Although today there is still some doubt about the efficiency of each medium, online advertising is doubling down with tools and methods to measure every single click. As trust has eroded over the delivery of results, the sincere effort to get it back is already underway. This is where a startup called Aeon Ads comes into the picture.
Create Meaningful Interactive Campaigns
Aeon Ads is a digital marketing agency that promises to take branding to another level with a unique combination of data analytics and content generation. Without exactly spilling the beans, founder and owner Elias Manolopoulos explains, “It’s time for something new in the industry. That’s why we decided to change our approach and focus more on merging big data, AI and emotions. We feel that the market is ready and that there is a need for such campaigns that hasn’t been met successfully in the past.” He describes the existing process as “outdated” and the results of traditional media as something that could definitely use some improvement. The three-step approach his company takes starts with an audit, proceeds with a competition analysis and ends with an activation strategy. But that’s not where Aeon Ads begs to differ.
Emotional Analysis
What can really make a product more appealing is the connection at a human level. Something that really speaks to the consumer by using words and images that were already there but someone just materialized them in a social media post. Aeon Ads uses concepts and values combined with the element of surprise. To achieve that level of interaction the team must tailor each and every message accordingly. The process starts with identifying a target group by lifestyle, personality and beliefs to be able to increase engagement and drive customer value. Once this is accomplished then you can start working on what the campaign will look like.
Brand Loyalty
Many consumers like making repeat purchases from brands, some switch all the time and some have no specific preference and buy something just because of the features it has to offer. This is a crucial part of market segmentation as a different marketing mix is needed for each group. You have to keep your existing clients happy as you attempt to grow and watch for the competition that’s trying to entice them away with discounts. Therefore it is necessary to hold your ground and to continue advertising. What the market calls replacement buyers or switchers may leave you if they find out that what you offer is not as feature rich as your competitors.
Social ROI
How Aeon Ads measures the efficiency of their campaigns as an investment is based on a more updated model. That means no more over emphasizing the number of likes and followers and paying more attention to what actually converts. Being popular in your industry is nice but not necessarily what really matters profit wise. It is crucial to assess each channel’s contribution to see what works and what doesn’t. This is vital if businesses want to recoup the audiences faith in social media advertising and attract talent.
Finally, the message of the ad campaign has to be modified accordingly so it can be easily understood. Potential clients have to become aware of the benefits of what you have to offer in order to create a better customer experience and close the gap that has eroded the audience’s trust.


