4A’s 2017 CreateTech To Examine A.I. And Creativity

09 Oct 2017

The 4A’s, the leading trade association representing the advertising agency business, will host its seventh annual CreateTech conference on Thursday, November 9 in Los Angeles, CA.
The conference – hosted at Deutsch’s 48,000-square-foot production facility for its in-house production company, Steelhead – promises to tackle a key question for industry players looking to expand into their digital toolkit: How is A.I. used in advertising and marketing today and how will it be used in the future?
Chick Foxgrover
“CreateTech’s A.I. theme next month is well-timed,” said Chick Foxgrover, 4A’s chief digital officer. “We have seen what is possibly just the start of an ‘agency A.I. arms race’ with large networks like J. Walter Thompson and Publicis announcing their plans for company-wide A.I. tools and MDC launching an A.I. consultancy. It’s a new frontier and we at the 4A’s are excited to present CreateTech as a space where agencies can spend time to learning about A.I., how to apply it today and anticipate future opportunities to merge A.I. into their creative processes.”
This year’s CreateTech speakers include:
Ari Popper – CEO and Founder, SciFutures
Catherine Findiesin Hays – Executive Director, The Wharton Future of Advertising Program
Chick Foxgrover – Chief Digital Officer, 4A’s
Joel Sucherman – Senior Director of Digital Products, NPR
Karin Giefer – Executive Creative Director of Applied Data, frog
Marla Kaplowitz – President & CEO, 4A’s
Mathew Ray – Technology Director, Google Creative Lab
Winston Binch – Chief Digital Officer, Deutsch North America
For the full agenda and the complete list of CreateTech 2017 speakers, visit 
The 4A’s is also offering attendees – and even those who cannot attend – an opportunity to extend their learning with the Conference Learning Pack – three sessions that provide additional knowledge of topics that will be discussed at next month’s CreateTech. The Conference Learning Pack includes sessions led by Tom Morton, SVP, Strategy, R/GA; Jeffrey Lancaster, Head of Product, Decoded; and Andrew Bosworth, VP, Ads & Business Platform, Facebook. See more details on the Learning Pack, available to 4A’s members and non-members, here


