AdvisorClarity Does “Big Reveal” At T3 Conference: First Provider To Bring Big Data To Independent Financial Advisors

31 Oct 2017

First Provider to Bring Big Data to Independent Financial Advisors Launches at T3 in Las Vegas Today
After months of rigorous development and beta testing, AdvisorClarity, LLC announced the launch of its comprehensive business intelligence software and service designed specifically for independent financial advisory firms.
AdvisorClarity not only provides robust visualizations with drill-down capabilities and advanced filtering, but the firm also manages data acquisition, data normalization and data maintenance. Fueled by big data, these robust metrics are aimed at elevating the independent financial advisory profession. Key benefits include:
Fully outsourced, enterprise-class business intelligence is now available to financial planners and investment advisory firms
Business leaders have immediate access to explore and analyze key performance indicators including profitability, AUM, net new assets, and client demographics
Compliance professionals are immediately notified of potential risk events and can further mitigate firm risk
SINGLE SOURCE OF TRUTH
“I’m constantly looking for technology that delivers meaningful benefits to our business,” said Billy Oliverio, SVP-Chief Marketing Officer of United Planners.  “AdvisorClarity’s ability to consolidate data into a single dashboard from various systems efficiently provides our executive team with mission critical information.  AdvisorClarity provides the optics on trends and patterns to help us make well-informed decisions in regard to our strategic planning process.”
“AdvisorClarity’s willingness to submit to our due diligence, including detailed cybersecurity requirements, demonstrated they are a good partner for us and our advisors,” said Bridget Gaughan, Chief Information Security Officer and Legal Counsel, United Planners. “We are also pleased they are taking the steps necessary to come ‘Under the Dome’ at cleverDome™.”
“AdvisorClarity creates a new, must-have category for successful advisory firms,” said Paul Osterberg, Managing Director of Strategy Basecamp. “The days of making decisions based solely on gut feeling are over. Today’s successful firms understand that properly analyzing the data they have in their systems is key to strategic leadership and staying ahead of regulatory requirements.”
“Most successful independent advisory firms license their mission-critical business software from at least 3 separate providers. Where integration exists, it typically centers around functional tasks,” said Nick Mancini, founder and CEO of AdvisorClarity. “AdvisorClarity is an advisory firm’s single source of truth, providing business leaders with visualized means to monitor their firm’s performance and lead their company, compliance professionals with the insight to significantly mitigate risk, and firm staff with a tool to spend less time on routine processing, regardless of the other systems used.”
AdvisorClarity is the first solution designed specifically for independent financial planners and investment advisors to visualize their firm’s efficacy, regardless of the underlying source or provider. Larger teams, in particular, will appreciate the insights they glean from AdvisorClarity’s business analytics.


