Rajant To Host “Autonomy Summit” At Greater Philadelphia

18 Jun 2018

The Greater Philadelphia Autonomy Summit Brings Together Innovators From The Metro Area And Across The Country For Engaging Discussions And Interactive Live Demonstrations
Rajant, a leading provider of mobile wireless mesh networks used in the application of autonomous robots and drones, will host thought leaders and experts in robotics, artificial intelligence (AI) and automation on June 21, 2018.
The Greater Philadelphia Autonomy Summit brings together innovators from the metro area and across the country for engaging discussions and interactive live demonstrations, while celebrating the grand opening of Philadelphia-based Rajant’s new global headquarters in Malvern, Pennsylvania.
Bob Schena
“Autonomy is a major part of the next wave of innovation coming out of Philadelphia, and Rajant is honored to be a part of the technology community here because autonomous applications cannot function without reliable wireless connectivity and real-time data,” said Bob Schena, CEO and co-founder of Rajant. “Rajant’s Kinetic Mesh network gives industries looking to enable autonomy and move toward the industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) a fully mobile, scalable and secure network infrastructure they can rely on.”
Read More: Interview With Dorian Selz, Co-Founder & CEO, Squirro
The Greater Philadelphia Autonomy Summit will include such highlights as:
Keynote speaker Jonas Cleveland, AI Entrepreneur and CEO of COSY, a Philadelphia-based robotics company
Jared Pratt, vice president of business development for Autonomous Solutions Inc. (ASI), showcasing vehicle automation for an array of industrial applications
Meet-and-greet with JD Claridge, a Shark Tank entrepreneur and CEO of xCraft, showcasing his x2i/x2Pro in action
Robotics demonstrations from companies like Fly Asylon and WAM-V
Rajant’s wireless mesh networks providing mobile communications to power autonomous drones
Jared Pratt
“The Greater Philadelphia Autonomy Summit is an opportunity for us to build awareness about why communications for robotic, autonomous systems are a critical enabler and requirement for successful delivery of our programs,” said Jared Pratt, vice president of business development for ASI. “Wireless mesh networks from Rajant work awesome in the very demanding environments ASI serves, such as mining and farming.”
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?
The event venue, Rajant’s new headquarters, exemplifies Rajant’s global growth, high-tech advancement and local commitment to the Philadelphia metro area. The minimalistic 28,000-square-foot space includes offices and warehousing as well as a Prototype Development Room for machining and 3D printing, and an Open Lab for compliance and thermal testing.
“Our new headquarters gives our Malvern technologists plenty of space in which to innovate, experiment and produce – and even gives us room to grow. We anticipate hiring approximately 40 new employees based out of this headquarters,” Schena said.


