VoiceBase Powers AVST’s Cloud-Based Voicemail-to-Text Service For CX-E

06 Mar 2018

VoiceBase, an industry leading provider of AI-powered speech analytics for the cloud announced a partnership with Applied Voice & Speech Technologies, Inc. (AVST) recently acquired by XMedius, a global leader in the field of enterprise communications solutions, to power its cloud-based voicemail-to-text service for CX-E, its Unified Communications platform. Together, AVST and VoiceBase deliver secure voice messaging for highly regulated industries – from healthcare, education, and government to the largest global enterprises. CX-E is an interoperable UC platform that deploys applications across an evolving voice and data infrastructure – premise to cloud. It’s best-of-breed enterprise UC applications include: voice messaging, unified messaging, mobile client, personal assistant, automated attendant, IVR, call center, fax and notification.
Through this integration, CX-E forwards a user’s voicemail recording to VoiceBase, who then quickly and accurately processes it from speech-to-text. The final transcript is then emailed directly to the CX-E user, accompanied by the original audio.
VoiceBase’s secure cloud-based voicemail-to-text transcriptions for CX-E enables users to instantly read important and time sensitive messages during meetings. VoiceBase’s own neural network-based speech engine and unique transcription features include number formatting, for easy click-to-call functionality. The VoiceBase cloud service goes beyond the basic requirements of reliability with multi-layered security, separated internal subnets, and encryption from end to end.
Jay Blazensky
“VoiceBase is excited to deliver enterprise-grade voice services with a reliable and proven partner like AVST,” commented Jay Blazensky, Cofounder & CRO of VoiceBase. “We’ve worked together to deliver a solution that meets their customer’s needs for regulations, security restrictions, accuracy expectations and speed of results. AVST provides the ideal framework for VoiceBase to layer on its speech analytics API to unlock fast and accurate voicemail-to-text for the enterprise.”
Tom Minifie
AVST offers a powerful enterprise-grade voicemail service and has 35 years of experience in the Unified Communications industry with more than 70% of its customer base consisting of medium to large enterprises. AVST has built a reputation as the industry’s most interoperable enterprise-class UC platform, serving some of the largest airlines, universities, government agencies and hospitals in North America.
“After testing various speech-to-text vendors in the market, VoiceBase was a leader in accuracy, speed and cost – all imperative components that allows us to offer best-of-breed voicemail-to-text services to our customers,” said Tom Minifie, AVST General Manager. “We’re excited to partner with VoiceBase as they continually innovate their technology and provide a platform that is reliable and scalable for enterprises.”


