Mist Announces New AI-Driven Wireless LAN For The Palo Alto Networks Application Framework

22 May 2018

Mist, the pioneer in self-learning networks powered by Artificial Intelligence (AI), today unveiled that the Mist Learning WLAN is part of the Palo Alto Networks® (NYSE: PANW) Application Framework. With Mist’s 100 percent open and programmable wireless platform, customers can now combine wireless service levels and location with security profiling and enforcement to deliver unprecedented visibility and control over mobile users, devices and IoT. This furthers Mist’s vision of using open APIs to automate key IT infrastructure services for ease, scale, and functionality.
Consuming cybersecurity innovations has become an arduous process. Organizations waste time deploying new sensors every time they want to collect a new piece of data and manage point products rather than improving security controls to stay ahead of attackers. The Palo Alto Networks Application Framework makes it easy to add new security capabilities quickly and efficiently. The framework extends the capabilities of the Palo Alto Networks Security Operating Platform, with a suite of APIs that developers can use to connect innovative apps with rich data, threat intelligence and enforcement points. Organizations gain immediate security value from apps developed by an open ecosystem of trusted innovators.
The Mist Learning WLAN is the first AI-driven wireless and location platform. It delivers unique insight into the Wi-Fi user experience and enables customers to accurately locate mobile devices with ease and scale. The Mist solution is built on an enterprise-scale microservices cloud platform that has full API support across all functions to enable automation. By being a part of the Palo Alto Networks Applications Framework, Mist customers get a secure wireless solution that sets and enforces policies, monitors the user quality of experience, creates automated workflows, and maps physical location with client experiences and security threats.
QUOTES
“We are pleased to be part of Palo Alto Networks Application Framework as the first AI-driven WLAN. Through integration efforts like this, we can now share critical user, device, application and security information and automate key actions pertaining to wireless security. This takes the industry to the next level and underscores the benefits of AI and programmability across the IT stack.”
– Sujai Hajela, CEO and co-founder, Mist.
“We are delighted to welcome Mist to the Palo Alto Networks Application Framework developer community. The framework provides our customers with superior security through cloud-based apps developed by innovative security providers, large and small. Together, we are fueling innovation in the cybersecurity market with apps that are built rapidly, engineered on a common framework, and deliver unique value while solving our customers’ toughest security challenges.”
– Lee Klarich, chief product officer, Palo Alto Networks


