World Tokenomic Forum Announces #CryptoHaus March 9-13 In Austin, TX

30 Jan 2018

Invitational 5-day Mashup Addresses The Efficacy Of Blockchain & Brands In A Private Intimate Setting In Downtown Austin
World Tokenomic Forum is bringing CryptoHaus to Austin, TX from March 9-13, 2018.  World Tokenomic Forum, the leading international organization convening the world’s leaders in cryptocurrency, government, capital markets, and technology, will be hosting a five-day event of formal content and informal networking for brand leaders, cypherpunks, capital providers, media, regulators, policy makers, and startups to address the efficacy of blockchain and brands.  Invitations to CryptoHaus will be limited and curated to 125 people per day.
World Tokenomic Forum’s CryptoHaus removes the hype-cycles of high-volume blockchain events, mainstream media buzz, and politicized agendas of blockchain and cryptocurrency, and drills deep into the true efficacy and consequences of adopting or failing to embrace a digital society and harness the technologies that power it. The overarching theme of blockchain and brands will be segmented into daily themes that include, infrastructure, identity, payments, capital markets, and commerce.
The announcement today is made as the executive team wraps up their week in Davos. and heads to Singapore for open houses in Asia as part of their 75-day trip around the world to find the top 64 blockchain related startups to compete for more than $1 million in prizes in its Sandcastle Startups Challenge. Startups under $200 million in current market cap can also complete a free 3-minute application for consideration.  CryptoHaus comes at the heels of the application deadline for the Sandcastle Startups Challenge which is March 15th 2018.
Chris J. Snook
“Austin is the perfect city and we are excited to announce early content partnerships with Digi.City to address the questions and opportunities facing smart cities and where and how blockchain may be a solution, and where it will not,” said Chris J. Snook, World Tokenomic Forum Founder/Executive Chairman, in a video release on the think tank’s website and facebook page today.
World Tokenomic Forum anticipates more than 1,000 requests for invitation to its CryptoHaus and will do its best to diversify and curate the best mix of leaders across various domains and industries like banking, healthcare, consumer packaged goods, media, finance, and technology. Leaders who make the CryptoHaus guest list will be notified via email by March 5, 2018 and must accept the invitation by March 8, 2018 or the wristband will be allocated to the next guest in the database ranking.
The World Tokenomic Forum is protective of the privacy of its member base, but some members and prize sponsors who have agreed to be listed include Blockchain Funding Corp, Cayman Enterprise City, Loeb.Nyc, The India National Crypto Exchange, The Australia National Crypto Exchange, Relitrade.io, BankChain, Digi.city, Bonin Ventures, Incubate Holdings, Launch Haus, The Jindal Centre For Social Innovation & Entrepreneurship, and Meticulosity.
A social-enterprise think tank convening the world’s leaders in cryptocurrency, government, capital markets, and technology. World Tokenomic Forum is the leading international organization for enabling public-private cooperation, interoperability, and innovation as we move to a new economic order in a token-based global economy.


