Milliman’s Gradient A.I. Platform Brings First A.I. Predictive Analytics Solution To Professional Employer Organization (PEO) Market

21 Mar 2018

Milliman, Inc., a leading global provider of actuarial, risk management, and technology solutions, today announced that gradient A.I., a Milliman predictive analytics platform, now offers a professional employer organization (PEO)-specific solution for managing workers’ compensation risk. gradient A.I. is an advanced analytics and A.I. platform that uncovers hidden patterns in big data to deliver a daily decision support system (DSS) for insurers, self-insurers, and PEOs. It’s the first solution of its kind to be applied to PEO underwriting and claims management.
Paul Hughes
“Obtaining workers’ compensation insurance capacity has been historically difficult because of the lack of credible data to understand a PEO’s expected loss outcomes. Additionally, there were no formal pricing tools specific to the PEO community for use with any level of credibility – until gradient A.I.  Pricing within a loss sensitive environment can now be done with the science of Milliman combined with the instinct and intuition of the PEO,” says Paul Hughes, CEO of Libertate/RiskMD, an insurance agency/data analytics firm that specializes in providing coverage and consulting services to PEOs. “Within a policy term we can understand things like claims frequency and profitability, and we can get very good real-time month-to-month directional insight, in terms of here’s what you should have expected, here’s what happened, and as a result did we win or lose?”
Stan Smith
gradient A.I., a transformational insurtech solution, aggregates client data from multiple sources, deposits it into a data warehouse, and normalizes the data in comprehensive data silos. “The uniqueness for PEOs and their service providers – and the power of gradient A.I. – emerges from the application of machine-learning capabilities on the PEOs data normalization,” says Stan Smith, a predictive analytics consultant and Milliman’s gradient A.I. practice leader. “With the gradient A.I. data warehouse, companies can reduce time, costs, and resources.”


