Noitom Travels MuseumExpo With The Alice Space Lunar Mission Virtual Reality Experience

05 May 2018

Conceived As A Complete Hardware And Content Package, Alice Space Allows Venues Like Museums And Science Centers To Offer Their Audiences Realistic And Immersive Experiences That Range From Exploring The Earth’s Moon, To Visiting Mars, Jupiter’s Europa And To Planets Beyond
Noitom, the creators of the out-of-home VR platform Project Alice, will head to Phoenix for the the American Alliance of Museums annual MuseumExpo taking place May 7th-9th at the Phoenix Convention Center to showcase Alice Space the first commercial multiplayer, location-based, mixed reality solution for museums and science centers.
Alice Space is a space exploration simulation platform. Conceived as a complete hardware and content package, Alice Space allows venues like museums and science centers to offer their audiences realistic and immersive experiences that range from exploring the Earth’s moon, to visiting Mars, Jupiter’s Europa and to planets beyond.
  Developed in collaboration with NASA by Australian multiple-award winning virtual content development studio, Opaque Space, Alice Space takes participants to a mixed reality environment where they land on the moon, interact with controls and with other players inside of the spacecraft, and eventually walk onto the surface of the moon to explore the terrain, engage with props and look up to planet Earth. The mixed reality experience lets players fully immerse themselves in a journey that has only been experienced by the astronauts of yesteryear.
Built from the ground up around a theme park-centric model, Alice Space gives operators uninterrupted, continuous play for 6 people with up to three eighteen-minute sessions per hour. Providing a tracking space of 7m by 10m, players can move freely and interact with one another as well as with physical objects. Combined with stunningly rendered content, Alice Space delivers a one-of-a-kind edutainment experience that family, friends, and students can share.
“VR is changing the game for so many industries, and this immersive technology is ideal for museum’s that want to connect their audiences to authentic experiences in state-of-the-art ways they never thought possible,” says Roch Nakajima, President of Noitom International. “With multiple groups of people being able to engage in this type of adventure together, museums and science centers can now offer the same excitement and memories that are normally reserved for big amusement parks. With Alice Space, we hope to deliver the planetarium of the future and expand the concept of a virtual reality classroom.”
During the MuseumExpo, Noitom will be offering demos of the complete Alice Space Earthlight: Lunar Mission experience. Up to six guests at one time will be able to don virtual reality goggles and VR backpacks to freely roam the inside of a NASA workstation and then explore the surface of the moon in mixed reality. Complimentary tickets for the demo experience during MuseumExpo are available now at alicespacemuseumexpo.eventbrite.com
MuseumExpo takes place May 7th-9th at the Phoenix Convention Center and will be located at Booth 1712. For more information about the American Alliance of Museums and MuseumExpo.
Alice Space is available for order now. The turn-key Alice Space package for 6 players lists for USD $199,000. In addition, a monthly subscription and maintenance fee of USD $6,000 will include new content every six months and limited equipment protection. Interested parties are invited to contact Noitom for detailed specifications.
Founded in 2011, Noitom Ltd. works with a team of dedicated engineers who develop world-class motion capture technology for consumer and industrial markets through the integration of MEMS sensors, pattern recognition, human kinetics and wireless transmission. Noitom is an international leader in innovative technology for use in animation, film, medical applications, robotics and gaming. Noitom is headquartered in Beijing with affiliate offices in Shenzhen, Shanghai, Phoenix, Los Angeles and Miami.
Read More: 10 Ways Companies Are Changing The Way You Game


