UAE Hosts World’s First International Forum On Global Governance Of AI

13 Feb 2018

The AI Initiative of The Future Society at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government Was Invited To Contribute To The Organization And Deliberations By The UAE Minister of State for Artificial Intelligence
Preeminent global artificial intelligence (AI) experts from over 20 countries gathered in the UAE to launch the inaugural Global Governance of AI Roundtable, a day-long forum organized under the auspices of the UAE Minister of State for AI. The AI Initiative of The Future Society at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government was invited to contribute to the organization and deliberations of this groundbreaking convening.
Organized as part of The World Government Summit, the Global AI Governance Forum took place on Saturday, February 10, in recognition of rapidly evolving AI technology and its implications for government, business and society. In organizing the roundtable, the UAE and The AI Initiative sought to facilitate dynamic policy recommendations and create a roadmap for ultimate adoption by nations around the world. The roundtable included almost 100 of the world’s foremost thinkers, leaders and practitioners of AI in one room – to contemplate and develop ways to help guide thinking about how to navigate the technological explosion.
Nicolas Miailhe
Nico Miailhe, President of The Future Society and co-founder of its AI Initiative, declared: “Roundtable participants represented a wide scope of stakeholders including renowned scientists, governments, multilateral organizations, regulators, prominent think-tanks, industry leaders, and investors. The deliberations mobilized pioneering collective intelligence methodologies and cognitive tools to produce new knowledge and understanding. Debates also examined practical considerations regarding the deployment of AI in transportation, healthcare, energy, finance and the legal system.”
Nicolas Economou, CEO of H5 and Chair of the Roundtable’s Committee on AI in the Law, said: “As the CEO of a Silicon Valley-based company that has developed cognitive and AI systems for the legal realm for nearly 20 years, I have both contributed to and witnessed the quiet rise of AI in all aspects of our lives. This unique, forward-looking roundtable initiated a much-needed dialogue on the global norms and ethical principles that should govern artificial intelligence for the benefit of society.”
Cyrus Hodes, Director of The AI Initiative declared: “The Future Society applauds the visionary leadership of the United Arab Emirates and of the Minister of State for Artificial Intelligence, His Excellency Omar bin Sultan Al Olama, at the intersection of AI and international cooperation for betterment of whole humanity. This seminal event can serve as a model for the much needed international governance of technologies.”
Based at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government, The Future Society is an international think-and-do tank that focuses on the impact and governance of emerging technologies, especially artificial intelligence. The Future Society’s mission is to help build a future that preserves humanity while harnessing the upsides of technology.
The AI Initiative of The Future Society brings together industry experts, researchers, students, alumni, and faculty from Harvard and beyond who seek to understand the consequences of the rise of artificial intelligence. Its mission is to help shape global AI policy framework
Read More: Former Microsoft Scientist Leo Chen Will Be Joining Lightchain’s Team


