Artificial Intelligence, The Connected Living Room And Making Digital Advertising Work For Healthcare To Form The Agenda For Brand Safety Applied, The Focus Of The 614 Group’s 7th Brand Safety Summit In New York City

21 Aug 2017

The 614 Group announced today its seventh Brand Safety Summit, entitled Brand Safety Applied will take place in New York City on Thursday, November 16, 2017. The agenda will feature a mix of panels, case studies and keynotes.
The event brings together senior industry thought leaders to discuss solutions to digital media’s most pressing issues. This year’s Summit is sponsored by GeoEdge, PulsePoint, BPA Worldwide, Tremor Video and is supported by DM Training and TAG, the Trustworthy Accountability Group.
Highly topical at this year’s New York Summit will be a look at artificial intelligence and how it will impact the digital advertising industry.
Read More: Tech For Good Summit In Paris: All You Need To Know From Day 1
The full-day program will take place on Thursday, November 16, 2017, beginning with a light networking breakfast at 8:00 am. The event will feature a full day of sessions and will conclude with an exclusive networking cocktail hour. Tickets are available for purchase at www.trustyourmedia.com. The venue will be announced in the following weeks.
Confirmed speakers for The Brand Safety Summit so far include:
Susan Schiekofer, Chief Digital Investment Officer, GroupM
Joe Barone, Managing Partner, Digital Operations, GroupM Connect
Mike Zaneis, President and CEO, TAG
John Toth, Vice President, Americas, Reuters Solutions
Warren Zenna, Executive Vice President, Managing Director, Mobext
Jackson Jeyanayagam, Chief Marketing Officer, Boxed
John Militello, Director of Marketing, Volvo North America
Natan Cohen, Corporate Vice President, Brand Marketing, New York Life Insurance Company
Joshua Palau, Vice President of Digital and Omnichannel, Bayer US
Read More: Blockchain Company Expands Services In Bid To Offer Americans New Way To Access Healthcare
The Brand Safety Summit is the premier event specifically programmed to address the most important issues that senior media executives face. This year’s focus, Brand Safety Applied, will serve as the backdrop for each session throughout the program with the goal of creating conversations that are actionable across both the buy and sell-side.
“Now is the time for the online advertising community to apply brand safety to everything we do. After years of talking about fraud, viewability and context, it is critical for industry leaders to work together to ensure safe online experiences,” said Robert Rasko, CEO and Founder of The 614 Group. “As Marc Pritchard famously said at the Interactive Advertising Bureau’s Annual Leadership Meeting, ‘The days of giving digital a pass are over. It’s time to grow up. It’s time for action.’ I’m excited to continue hosting this industry-leading event which has, since its launch served as the premier place where decision makers come together to improve online advertising. The Brand Safety Summit maintains its place in both the US and UK markets as a must-attend event for senior leaders with programming that transcends the room.”
The agenda will feature panels covering Artificial Intelligence In Digital Advertising, Brand Safety Applied, Making Digital Advertising Work for Healthcare and The Connected Living Room. New to this year’s Summit are three breakout sessions which will dive into arriving at a brand safety KPI for specific departments such as sales and ad operations. Industry announcements will be made by Grapeshot and TAG.
Read More: How Citizen Health Is Redesigning Healthcare With An Open & Transparent Marketplace


