Clari And MarketoⓇ Announce Strategic Partnership To Break Barriers Between Sales And Marketing

12 Jul 2018

Integrated solutions to create alignment for building a healthy pipeline and converting it into closed business
Clari, the leading provider of AI solutions for sales, and Marketo, the leading provider of engagement marketing software and solutions, today announced a strategic partnership to unite sales and marketing across the revenue funnel.
Andy Byrne
“Most sales and marketing teams operate in silos — and it’s hurting the business,” said Andy Byrne, CEO of Clari. “Our partnership with Marketo is aimed at breaking that data divide, providing both groups a new level of shared insight. With our joint solutions, sales leaders get clear visibility into marketing engagement in active deals so they can forecast more accurately, and marketing leaders see which campaigns are actually driving revenue so they can nurture more effectively.”
With the Clari Marketo Connector, reps can see when prospects open marketing emails, download content, or register for webinars. They can view this marketing engagement data alongside other prospect activity signals captured in Clari, including emails and meetings, to help strategically navigate the sales cycle and work with marketing on deal acceleration. With these additional signals, managers also get a broader context around how deals are progressing so they can identify risk as they inspect the pipeline.
Follow Us
Eric Johnson
“Marketo and Clari are joining forces to tackle one of the biggest challenges facing our customers today: the disconnect around building a predictable revenue model,” said Eric Johnson, Chief Sales Officer at Marketo. “For the first time, sales and marketing can come together to build a healthy pipeline and rapidly turn it into closed business.”
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
Clari and Marketo plan to bring to market a range of additional integrations with Marketo applications including Marketo Sales Engage and Bizible designed to:
Identify promising opportunities by enhancing Clari’s AI-based Opportunity Score with Marketo engagement data so reps can get an even stronger indication of which deals are most likely to close.
Prioritize engaged accounts at the right time by monitoring marketing activity in Clari Team Activity and intelligently alerting reps when engagement is high so they can focus their efforts on those accounts that display real buying intent.
Streamline nurture of idle accounts by feeding data from Clari into Marketo to trigger smart marketing campaigns against accounts and opportunities that need marketing support.
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs


