GoPro Rolls Out Enhanced Subscription Service: Plus

01 Feb 2018

Damage Replacement, Mobile Cloud Backup and Unlimited Photo Storage Added to $4.99 Monthly Service
GoPro, Inc is building on the success of its Plus subscription service with the introduction of new benefits that deliver significant value to GoPro customers at no additional cost.
The company announced details of the expanded Plus monthly service:
Camera replacement – If you break your GoPro we’ll replace it, no questions asked
Mobile cloud backup – The GoPro App now automatically backs up your photos and videos, eliminating the need to connect to a computer or buy new SD cards
Unlimited photo storage
35 hours of video storage
20% off accessories at gopro.com
Front-of-the-line priority phone and chat support
Mobile cloud backup will be available on iOS February 20 and on Android in the spring.
“Plus streamlines the GoPro experience and delivers outsized value for our customers,” said GoPro Founder and CEO Nicholas Woodman. “Our subscription business, Plus, has proven popular with consumers and the roll out of our enhanced service marks the first of several subscription initiatives we will introduce this year.”
GoPro makes it easy for people to celebrate and share experiences. We believe life is more meaningful when shared. We build cameras, software and accessories that help the world share itself in immersive and exciting ways.
GoPro, HERO, Karma, Quik, QuikStories and their respective logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of GoPro, Inc. in the United States and other countries. The Bluetooth word mark and logos are registered trademarks owned by Bluetooth SIG, Inc. and any use of such marks by GoPro is under license. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
The wearable camera market was valued at US$2.958 billion in 2017 and is projected to reach US$8.143 billion in 2023 exhibiting a robust CAGR of 18.39% during the forecast period. Key industry players profiled as part of this section are Digital Ally, Apple, Panasonic, Garmin, GoPro, iON, Narrative, VIEVU, and Xiaomi.


