CallMiner Eureka Named Best Speech Analytics Solution And A Top 10 Contact Center Technology

14 May 2018

The Eureka 10 Post-Contact Interaction Analytics Suite was recognized for its user-friendliness, robust in-depth analysis of customer interactions and agent performance, and fast response to its customers’ needs.
CallMiner, the award-winning platform provider of speech and customer engagement analytics, announced today that Eureka 10, the post-contact interaction analytics suite, has been recognized as Best Speech Analytics Solution in the Top 10 Contact Centre Technologies of 2018. The awards, run annually by Call Centre Helper, recognize the best contact center technologies available globally. The Top 10 is created by customer votes, making these the most impartial of all the contact centre technology awards. Eureka 10 was recognized for being intuitive and user-friendly with the intent of making customers more self-sufficient and less reliant on professional services to drive their own analytics success.
Jonty Pearce
Jonty Pearce, Editor of Call Centre Helper, said: “These awards are voted on by real-life contact centers that are using the technology, rather than selected by a panel of ‘experts’. The detailed comments made by those that voted for CallMiner clearly show what customers love about the technology. CallMiner was singled out for its user-friendliness and robust in-depth analysis of customer interactions and agent performance, which provides management with excellent insight into what is happening in their contact center every day.”
Comments made by customers who voted for Eureka 10 include:
“New features are constantly being added per customer suggestions. They are a company that truly listens to their customers.”
“The speed to intelligence and user-friendly interface make improving our business a far more attainable goal.”
“CallMiner has an incredible ability to depict reporting statistics instantly, is consistently improved with newer features every month, and offers functionality for supervisors to identify key areas of their agents’ calls that need to be addressed or praised.”
Paul Bernard
“We are honored that our customers’ passion for this technology helped us win the Best Speech Analytics Solution category and a place among the top 10 call center technologies of 2018,” said Paul Bernard, President and CEO of CallMiner. “We are delighted that our customers picked out the way we help them improve their business by delivering intelligence from customer interactions.”
Combining a speech-to-text recognition engine and powerful customer journey mapping and analysis tools, this technology drives Voice of the Customer (VoC) programs. It does so by delivering actionable insights to organizations, helping them to improve agent coaching and performance, drive great CX, lower operating costs and improve business outcomes.
Eureka’s multichannel customer journey contact analytics platform is offered as a fully hosted or premise SaaS system. It improves contact center and enterprise performance through revealing insights from automated analysis and scoring of 100% of customer communications across multiple channels – including calls, chat, email, texts, social media, surveys and more.
CallMiner’s customizable and scalable category and scorecard building tools are designed to be intuitive and user-friendly with the intent of making customers more self-sufficient and less reliant on professional services to drive their own analytics success. The platform is also based on an open systems architecture and through the power of its robust ingestion and export API capabilities can be integrated with virtually any IVR, recorder, telephony, WFO, CRM, big data, or text-based technologies.


