Arcadis Names Justin Wright Chief Information Officer For North And Latin America

09 Jan 2018

Wright To Lead Regional Information Technology Team While Driving Digital Innovation
Arcadis announces the appointment of Justin Wright as chief information officer for its North and Latin America regions. Wright joined Arcadis in 2007 and brings 20 years of professional experience in the design, consulting, real estate, and aviation industries.
With two decades as a successful leader, Wright brings a wealth of expertise delivering innovative, technology-based solutions for companies and clients across multiple geographies and industry sectors.
In his new role, Wright joins Arcadis’ global information technology (IT) leadership team to oversee regional IT operations while defining and implementing a progressive digital strategy for the firm and its clients.
Joachim Ebert
“Arcadis has prioritized technology investment as a key part of its ‘Creating a Sustainable Future’ strategy,” said Joachim Ebert, CEO, Arcadis North America. “We recognize the opportunities technology creates to foster innovation and enhance our ability to service our clients, while making Arcadis the best place to work. Justin’s experience and knowledge makes him perfectly suited to grow and enhance our use of technology.”
Justin Wright
“Much of what were considered ideas just 10 years ago is now reality. Digital disruption is all around, and businesses must digitize and modernize to stay ahead. Drones are monitoring assets; building information modeling is used to design infrastructure; and sensors are being used to monitor sea levels, environmental conditions, construction sites, and more in real-time,” said Justin Wright. “These are exciting times, and I look forward to growing our portfolio of technological solutions for our clients.”
Wright holds a Master of Business Administration and a Bachelor of Science in management from Arizona State University. He is based out of Arcadis’ Phoenix, Arizona, office.


