NGDATA Sets Up Global AI Research Lab In Singapore

06 Apr 2018

Global Research Lab to Drive Innovations in Machine Learning and AI for Organizations Worldwide
NGDATA®, the customer experience management solutions company, today announced that it has made significant investments to establish an Artificial Intelligence (AI) Research Lab in Singapore, the company’s first research and development team outside of Belgium. As part of the company’s expansion into the region, NGDATA will collaborate with partners and customers in the financial services and telco industries to develop and promote research on machine learning and impact prediction models.
“Singapore has emerged as a hotbed for data-driven technology and innovation, and we see Asia-Pacific as a very important growth area for NGDATA”
According to Gartner1, 48 percent of organizations in Asia Pacific reported their data and analytics maturity to be in the differentiating and transformational levels of maturity…compared to 44 percent in North America and 30 percent in EMEA. The NGDATA AI Research Lab is supported by the Singapore Economic Development Board (EDB) and its goal is to apply machine learning and automated data capabilities to enrich the customer DNA, enabling companies with deeper insights and context around individuals and groups.
Frank Hamerlinck
“Singapore has emerged as a hotbed for data-driven technology and innovation, and we see Asia-Pacific as a very important growth area for NGDATA,” said Frank Hamerlinck, COO of NGDATA. “It makes sense, therefore, to establish a dedicated AI Research Lab in Singapore and to continue expanding our partnerships and technology development with key financial services and telco companies. We are excited to enable more companies to benefit from machine learning and AI capabilities, and to further establish Singapore as an important contributor to the next phase of our global growth.”
The decision to establish the NGDATA AI Research Lab in Singapore was motivated by the city-state’s strategic location in Asia, its vibrant Infocomms and Technology (ICT) ecosystem, and the opportunity to collaborate with leading universities and industry players. Singapore represents a dynamic and innovative environment where talent and resources combine with top notch ICT infrastructure. This offers an ideal platform to experiment with novel technologies like machine learning in a market of strategic importance for NGDATA.
Tung Meng Fai
“We are delighted for NGDATA to expand its investment in Singapore and establish a Global AI Research Lab in this region. The lab will build deep capabilities and be a valuable addition to Singapore’s AI ecosystem. It will also provide tremendous job opportunities and add to Singapore’s growing pool of AI talent,” said Mr. Tung Meng Fai, Director, Infocomms and Media, EDB.
Companies around the globe use NGDATA’s customer data platform (CDP) to drive meaningful customer experiences by delivering the right content to the right customer at the right time. It eliminates organizational, system and data roadblocks, enabling companies in data-driven industries to become truly customer-centric. The CDP provides insights into historical and real-time customer interactions, from all sources, so companies gain a holistic and individual customer view, enabling them to deliver superior customer experiences across digital and physical channels to increase NPS (Net Promoter Score) and solidify customer lifetime value.
 


