Sophia The Robot Joins Celebrated Lineup Of Global Tech Industry Leaders At EMerge Americas 2018 

21 Feb 2018

eMerge Americas Offers Startups, Entrepreneurs, VCs, Major Businesses And Government Officials An Opportunity To Stand Shoulder To Shoulder With Digital’s Brightest Minds And Build Powerful Partnerships Without Borders
eMerge Americas, the premier technology event connecting Latin America, North America and Europe, today announced that Sophia, the most advanced and celebrated AI robot developed by Hanson Robotics, will be joining the eMerge Main Stage alongside a wide range of luminaries, including Diego Dzodan, VP of LatAm for Facebook & Instagram; Felipe Millon, GM/Regional Leader, South East US of Amazon Prime; and Sandra Lopez, VP at Intel Sports Group.
Xavier Gonzalez
“We are absolutely thrilled to welcome Sophia to eMerge Americas, fresh off the heels, quite literally, of receiving her first pair of legs and mesmerizing people worldwide as she took her first steps,” said Xavier Gonzalez, CEO of eMerge Americas. “Sophia joins an already impressive speaking lineup of the brightest minds in business and government and we are looking forward to welcoming her to Miami, the technology hub of the Americas.”
Now in its fifth year, eMerge Americas offers startups, entrepreneurs, VCs, major businesses and government officials an opportunity to stand shoulder to shoulder with digital’s brightest minds and build powerful partnerships without borders. The two-day conference begins April 23 at the Miami Beach Convention Center.
eMerge Americas & Wyncode Academy Bring You an Adrenaline Filled Hackathon
In the days before eMerge Americas 2018 kicks off, teams will convene at Miami Dade College for a mind-stimulating coding competition that continues well into dawn on Sunday. In partnership with Wyncode Academy, and sponsored by Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines, the Hackathon offers participants the chance to win thousands in prizes, plus a bounty of snacks, drinks and caffeine!
Attendees will have the unique opportunity to stay alongside speakers and other attendees at the Loews Miami Beach Hotel, the eMerge Americas 2018 headquarter hotel. Network 24/7 at this South Beach icon with an enviable oceanfront view, all at an exclusive eMerge Americas rate for 2018 attendees.
eMerge Americas serves as the preeminent innovative thought exchange transforming Miami into the technological hub of the Americas. By connecting global industry leaders and investors with America’s top business executives, technology decisionmakers, and entrepreneurs, partnerships are forged that spur visionary innovation and technological advancements for the betterment of business and society. The eMerge Americas founding partners include: Medina Capital, A Rod Corporation, Greenberg Traurig, Knight Foundation, Miami-Dade County, and the Miami Herald.
Read More: GVR Fund Raises $18.3 Million, Investing In Seventeen AR And VR Startups


