Neustar Appoints Shailesh Shukla To Lead Security Solutions

18 May 2018

Network and security business leader will drive product innovation and scale
Neustar®, Inc., a trusted, neutral provider of real-time information services, today announced the appointment of Shailesh Shukla as General Manager (GM) of Security Solutions. Shukla will oversee the company’s industry leading DDoS, DNS and IP Intelligence solutions including its cybersecurity operations. He will report to Neustar Senior Vice President, Chief Data and Analytics Officer Venkat Achanta.
Neustar Appoints Shailesh Shukla to Lead Security Solutions
Shukla has wide ranging technology and business expertise in developing, delivering and scaling cloud-based innovations in mobility, security and infrastructure. He also has extensive management know-how overseeing business units generating more than $2 billion annually and leading large, global teams. Shukla joins Neustar from Instart Logic, a high growth Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) company with a cloud-based platform leveraging artificial intelligence and machine learning.
“We are fortunate to have Shailesh take the helm of our Security Solutions team,” said Achanta. “Digital security and performance are two of the most pressing needs of our clients and the industry at large. Shailesh has a more than 20-year track record delivering innovative solutions that address digital performance and security for businesses around the world.”
At Instart Logic, Shukla served as the chief operating officer, responsible for conceptualizing, developing, deploying and bringing to market the company’s portfolio of products. Prior to Instart Logic, Shukla worked at Cisco Systems as General Manager of successive business units including mobility software and applications, converged optical and routing, and edge routing. These businesses ranged in revenue from $100 million to $2.5 billion. Previously, Shukla was Vice President of Marketing and Partnerships at Juniper Networks. Earlier in his career, he was part of the management team that took Redback Networks public. He was a strategy consultant at Mercer Management Group and Booz Allen Hamilton and started his career as a network engineer at Sprint. Shukla holds a MBA from the MIT Sloan School of Management, a M.S. in Electrical Engineering from the University of Kansas and a B.S. in Engineering from Birla Institute of Technology and Science.
“I am delighted to join Neustar and work with the extraordinarily talented Security team to help drive groundbreaking solutions that leverage the company’s unique OneID system,” said Shukla.
The Neustar OneID system delivers actionable identity intelligence from billions of corroborated daily transactions across digital traffic, global communications, customer interactions and verifications. As the only identity player handling both global DNS traffic and DDoS mitigation coupled with its IP-reputation solution, Neustar has real-time insights into safe and unsafe locations across the web, empowering it to divert threats away from client enterprises. As a result, Neustar security solutions help clients enhance digital security and performance by unlocking the most up-to-date information they need to authenticate connections, ensure transactions, enable compliance and optimize operations.


