Gaming Partners International Corporation, BrainChip Inc, And Xuvi, LLC Signed Licensing And Development Agreement

01 Feb 2018

The Combined Technology Will Empower Casinos With Predictive Analytics, Real-Time And Accurate Comp Decisions, Secure Table Currency, Protect Table Games From Fraud, All Using Immersive Data Analytics And Artificial Intelligence
Gaming Partners International Corporation, a worldwide leading provider of casino table products, currency, and radio frequency identification (RFID) solutions, has entered global licensing and development agreements to develop an advanced Automated Table Solution (ATS) with BrainChip Holdings Ltd. (ASX: BRN), a leading developer of accelerated solutions for artificial intelligence (AI) applications, and with Xuvi, LLC, a data science company that uses immersive data analytics and automation for intelligent data-driven decisions.
Arun Rajaraman
“We look forward to partnering with GPI to bring table game automation technology to casino operators,” said Arun Rajaraman, CEO at Xuvi. “The combined technology will empower casinos with predictive analytics, real-time and accurate comp decisions, secure table currency, protect table games from fraud, improve productivity, and optimize revenues, all using immersive data analytics and artificial intelligence.”
Louis DiNardo
BrainChip’s President, Louis DiNardo commented, “GPI has very deep expertise in casino game operations, a broad base of existing customers, and a premier global sales and service team that will bring these products to market. Our Artificial Intelligence expertise is well suited to address the challenges of achieving high quality video analytics in the difficult casino environment. We are very excited about this development.”
Greg Gronau, GPI’s President and CEO commented, “With our new Automated Table Solution (ATS), GPI will leverage BrainChip visioning technologies, Xuvi’s immersive data analytics, and GPI’s radio frequency identification to provide currency security, game protection and trend analysis, accurate comping, and marketing automation. GPI acknowledges this is a major step forward in developing the Automated Table Solution.”
GPIC manufactures and supplies casino table game equipment to licensed casinos worldwide.
Xuvi, LLC is a Las Vegas, NV based data science company – empowering gaming, retail and hospitality operators with immersive data analytics & automation to engage consumers, increase operational efficiency, and optimize revenues using artificial intelligence.
BrainChip Holdings Ltd. is a leading provider of software and hardware-accelerated solutions for Advanced artificial intelligence and machine learning applications.  The Company has developed a revolutionary new spiking neural network technology that can learn autonomously, evolve and associate information just like the human brain.


