Digi International Helps The Zamboni Company Bring IoT To Ice Rinks With World’s First Smart Ice Resurfacer

15 Feb 2018

Digi Delivers Connected Hardware and Customized Application for Zamboni Connect™, an Intelligent Ice Resurfacing Solution that Minimizes Downtime and Optimizes Performance
Digi International, a leading global provider of Internet of Things (IoT) products and services, has helped launch the world’s first smart, connected ice resurfacer from the Zamboni Company, a world leader in ice resurfacing technology. Digi’s professional services team developed a customized application leveraging its Digi Wireless Vehicle Bus Adaptor (WVA) to create the custom IoT application Zamboni Connect. This ready-to-use IoT solution provides previously unavailable insight into resource management and decision-making based on actual machine and operator performance.
Digi International Wireless Vehicle Bus Adapter (WVA).
This is the first IoT solution requiring only an Internet connection for users to log into the platform from any computer or handheld device in any location, and have instant access to data, information and remote oversight of their ice resurfacer operations. A clean, simple dashboard optimized for smartphone, tablet or web-based use gives ice resurfacer owners and operators unprecedented insight into their equipment and processes.
“We knew there was tremendous value in the data being generated during the ice resurfacing process. The challenge would be to provide the right data in a format which was easy for arena operations of any size to leverage and utilize,” said Derek Gunn, Vice President of Operations for the Zamboni Company. “By collaborating with Digi, we were able to design, build and launch a web and mobile application with complex reporting capabilities while maintaining the flexibility to grow over time. Using their unique products and working with their professional services team, our goal of connecting Zamboni machines to the IoT and being first to market was achieved.”
In addition to tracking key performance metrics like speed, energy consumption and ice-making water consumption, Zamboni Connect keeps maintenance logs, offers maintenance suggestions and houses reference materials for the machines. This combination of data and access to manufacturer best practices allows for maintenance that is truly predictive rather than just preventative. These smart services are available across Zamboni’s line of ice resurfacers, both electric-powered and fuel-powered, and Zamboni Connect supports both single resurfacer rinks and arena fleets.
“When people think of Zamboni, they probably don’t realize how complicated ice resurfacers are and what’s involved with maintenance and upkeep,” said Tracy Roberts, vice president of technology services for Digi International. “Zamboni helped us understand how to design their application to present key data, helping owners and operators understand and take care of their machines.”


