AI Recruitment Software Harver Increases Series A To $12.3 M

16 Jan 2018

Harver will Focus On Bringing Its AI Matching Technology To Companies Of All Sizes, Specifically Within The United States
Harver, the leading software in AI pre-hiring and talent-matching, announced it has raised an additional $4.2 million USD in growth round as part of a Series A funding led by Insight Venture Partners. This brings Harver’s total funding to $15.6 million USD.
With this additional funding, Harver plans to expand the team, continuing its rapid growth and supporting its mission of solving major recruitment problems. By hiring additional team members, Harver will focus on bringing its AI matching technology to companies of all sizes, specifically within the United States.
Over the past two years, Harver has captured the attention of big-name tech and Fortune 500 companies. Most recently, Harver signed deals with Zappos, Netflix, Booking.com, Vodafone, OpenTable, and Casper. However, Harver CEO and founder, Barend Raaff, recognizes recruitment pains and problems are present in companies of all sizes.
Barend Raaff
“We believe hiring the best talent is important for any company; big or small. In the past years, we have enhanced our platform and AI to make our matching technology available for any job, in any language, anywhere in the world. Based on requests from the market over the past years, we believe it’s the right time to accelerate on these opportunities,” Barend Raaff.
Harver’s software allows companies and applicants to eliminate the resume, establishing a more accurate and effective hiring process while also removing hiring bias and discrimination. Through automating the application process, Harver analyzes modules, tests, and assessments to match the right candidate to the job – without factoring in age, name, look, gender, or resume.
In the past year, Harver has transformed its software to an open ecosystem, allowing the technology to fit the hiring needs of companies of all sizes and languages.
“Our AI matching technology has been heavily utilized by some of the world’s most successful brands and the they are very happy with the results. We want to make it available to companies of all sizes and we believe the time for further expansion is now.” Raaff said.
In 2017, Harver used their first round of Series A funding to expand to the United States by opening its US Headquarters in New York City.  Because US companies understand the value and importance of finding the best talent, Harver believes their matching technology will fill a big need within the market.


