Avionos Releases New Data Revealing How Consumer Expectations Are Driving Retail Strategies

13 Jun 2018

Report provides advice on how eCommerce decision makers can use digital transformation strategies to meet advanced customer expectations
Today, Avionos, a digital services and solutions provider focused on connected customer engagement, releases its newest data study, “The 2018 Consumer Expectations Report.” The report reveals how increased customer expectations are driving brands and retailers to transform their digital landscapes as a means to stay competitive.
To uncover more about eCommerce expectations today, Avionos surveyed more than 1,400 consumers about their online shopping habits, preferences and expectations in the year ahead. As a result, the survey outlines retail trends from a consumer perspective and offers strategic advice for how eCommerce decision makers can use a digital transformation strategy to gain a competitive edge.
Read More: How AI And Blockchain Can Revolutionize Pharmaceutical Trials
Scott Webb
“Traditional shopping experiences are no longer enough. Consumers want every interaction from brands and retailers to be quick, personalized and informative whenever and wherever they are,” says Scott Webb, president of Avionos. “Amazon has changed the game, particularly in the way that it has raised the bar for consumer expectations. This has caused retailers to revamp their omni-channel strategies and focus on offering experience-driven commerce that provides engaging content, personalized experiences and shoppable moments across all channels.”
The key findings of the report include:
Google and Amazon trump traditional search methods: When browsing online, two-thirds (66 percent) of consumers begin their search on Amazon or Google.
Social media is an active commerce channel, influencers are not: Sixty percent of consumers have never purchased a product promoted by a celebrity or social influencer, but more than half of consumers (55 percent) have made a purchase through a social media channel, such as Facebook, Instagram or Pinterest.
Contextualized content drives consumer confidence: Fifty-four percent of consumers feel more confident in their online purchases if the retailer offers detailed product specifications, while 49 percent feel more confident if a product listing has extra content available.
Physical retail is still relevant: The majority of consumers (63 percent) prefer to purchase big-ticket items like electronics or furniture in a store, and 52 percent said they prefer to research these products on desktop or mobile devices.
Consumers expect AI to streamline shopping experiences: Nearly half (42 percent) of consumers feel that AI will lead to faster checkouts.
Read More: Kraken Joins NVIDIA Inception Program
Dan Neiweem
“The retail industry is constantly changing as new channels and technologies emerge,” says Dan Neiweem, principal and co-founder of Avionos. “We’re at the cusp of AI being a more frequently used tool in shopping experiences. Moving forward, we can expect consumers to demand improved, AI-enabled experiences, such as faster checkout and customer service responses and more personalized offerings, ultimately driving a better all-around customer experience, as well as better business operations.”


