ZSpace Unveils World’s First Augmented Reality/Virtual Reality Laptop

06 Jul 2018

zSpace Laptop Combines AR/VR With Mobile Solution, Encouraging Collaboration and Creativity for Learners of All Ages
According to a national study by Project RED, schools with one-to-one laptop environments show higher levels of academic achievement. Now with today’s launch of the world’s first augmented reality (AR)/virtual reality (VR) laptop from Silicon Valley company, zSpace Inc., the laptop learning environment comes to life, allowing students to lift images from the screen and examine them in detail, gaining a deeper understanding of concepts by physically manipulating virtual simulations, from energy and motion to molecules and organisms.
Paul Kellenberger
“When students put on a VR headset and take a field trip or explore human anatomy, they are having an individual experience. It doesn’t encourage making connections, creativity or collaboration. zSpace was created specifically for learners, creating a shared AR/VR learning environment,” said Paul Kellenberger, CEO, zSpace. “Today’s launch of the zSpace Laptop takes that experience to the next level, moving our comfortable, interactive learning experience to the accessibility and affordability of the mobile platform.”
Unlike other virtual reality solutions, such as head-mounted displays, that can be isolating, zSpace empowers students to “learn by doing” in a virtual environment where it is easy to take risks, make and correct mistakes, manipulate many variables, and not worry about material costs or clean up.
Coupled with zSpace’s proven applications, the laptop provides students with a real-world learning environment and a personalized learning experience that align to state and national standards. A fully functional laptop, students can also use the mobile zSpace solution to explore the internet, complete classwork assignments, take online assessments or any other activities that they would use a computer for at school.
Launched for education just five years ago, students at more than 800 school districts, technical centers, medical schools and universities across the country learn with zSpace. A recent survey of teachers using zSpace with their students demonstrated their belief in the power of AR/VR to transform learning. Nearly 100 percent of teachers surveyed said that using AR/VR allows them to expose their students to things that would otherwise be impossible.
Read More: Working Together To Strengthen The Lives Of Rural Americans
Atlanta Public Schools is one of the first districts planning to introduce the zSpace Laptop to its students.
“The new zSpace laptop is going to be a game-changer,” said Aleigha Henderson-Rosser, Ed.D., director, instructional technology, Atlanta Public Schools. “We introduced the zSpace virtual reality experience at the elementary, middle and high school levels three years ago. Schools have supported their STEAM, core academic, and Career and Technical Education programs by integrating the all-in-one zSpace hardware and software solution. Now we will continue to support these programs with the new zSpace Laptop. The laptop device will give us additional flexibility as we determine our implementation models through Atlanta Public Schools.”
Students at Buffalo Public School District in New York are starting their third year learning with zSpace, now in over 15 district schools, with the plan to be in all schools in the district by the end of next year.
“Bringing AR/VR to the laptop gives our students the ability to learn in a more flexible virtual environment as well as to complete traditional laptop work,” said Sanjay Gilani, chief technology officer, Buffalo Public Schools.
Read More: AgEagle’s Drone Imagery To Help Reduce Chemicals In Food
To support the stunning and powerful 3D graphics performance, zSpace Laptop combines a low-power, high-performance AMD embedded accelerated processing unit (APU) with AMD Embedded Radeon™ graphics LiquidVR™ technology, resulting in an incredibly realistic and comfortable AR/VR experience.
Mark Papermaster
“For decades, AMD technology has improved the way that people live, work and play. Now, with AMD’s x86 processor and graphics technology integrated into the new zSpace AR/VR Laptop, we are thrilled to provide the engine for a transformational platform that enables a new genre of learning with interactive, visually engaging and highly responsive content,” said Mark Papermaster, chief technology officer and senior vice president of technology and engineering, AMD. “Learners will dynamically engage with content and learn new concepts through a truly immersive experience, creating ‘presence’ — a state of awareness where a virtual world feels so real they’ll believe they are there.”
Read More: World Cup 2018: Avid Maestro Graphics Systems Give AR Capabilities For Globo’s Coverage


