Axonom Adds Google Daydream And Samsung Gear VR To Powertrak VR Design Viewer

30 Jan 2018

Explore 3D Product Configurations In Virtual Reality With A Smartphone Connected to Google Daydream, Google Cardboard or Samsung Gear VR
Axonom, a global provider of visual CPQ software with virtual reality experiences, today announces Powertrak VR Design Viewer support for Google Daydream and Samsung Gear VR devices. Powertrak VR Design Viewer delivers a virtual reality experience of 3D product configurations to iPhones and Android smartphones, enabling businesses to share product designs and space layout concepts to prospective customers via smartphone VR headsets.
The Powertrak VR Design Viewer app for Samsung Gear VR, powered by Oculus platform, is available for download on the Oculus Store, and Google Daydream on Google Play.
Mike Belongie
“Our virtual reality product line initially supported high-end, tethered-based VR devices such as HTC Vive and Oculus Rift but we’re now expanding into more affordable smartphone-powered VR headsets,” said Mike Belongie, COO at Axonom. “We’re offering a free trial of a surgical suite designto anyone with a Google Daydream, Samsung Gear VR or Google Cardboard headset.”
Axonom combines visual configure, price, quote (CPQ) software with virtual reality to help consumers make more informed buying decisions. The company’s Powertrak 3D CPQ and VR solution suite enables users to interactively configure make-to-order products, place them in a custom designed environment, then explore in virtual reality.
“Businesses that sell configurable products find it challenging to effectively show how products look and fit in an environment, and then modify the design on-the-fly,” said Belongie. “Extending 3D product configurations to virtual reality on a mobile VR headset is not only affordable and convenient but it delivers an immersive experience for full spatial understanding and validation.”
Land Yacht Motor Werks, LLC offers an interactive 3D configuration experience on its website for customers to design, quote, and order customizable transportation solutions. “We’re investing in visualization and virtual reality technology to improve the configuration experience and provide our customers with tools to become self-sufficient shoppers,” said Michael Alpha, General Manager for Land Yacht Motor Werks. “Powertrak enables our customers to custom design Mercedes-Benz vans on a laptop from their home, office or dealership. The next phase of the project extends that visual configuration process to virtual reality viewing and exploration on smartphones for a profound validation experience.”
Axonom is a worldwide leader in marrying visual configure, price, quote (CPQ) software with virtual reality (VR) experiences. Established in 2002, the developer of Powertrak 3D Product Configurator and VRoom enables sales, channel partners, and customers around the world to visually build products and design environments, then experience it in virtual reality.


