Geneinno’s Multi-Function Underwater Drone Has Raised Over $100k On Kickstarter

26 Jun 2018

It Includes Purple And Red Dive Filters To Correct The Colours Of The Videos And Photos Captured Up To The Depth Of 5-21 Metres In Fresh Or Saltwater
Geneinno, based in Shenzhen, has recently raised more than $100k on Kickstarter for Titan – The Deepest Diving Underwater Drone for Everyone. Its main aim is to provide a better experience to the people who explore unknown underwater worlds along with various other underwater tasks. The company has released Titan as its second underwater drone for this purpose.
Whether you are an underwater photographer, a scuba diver, a marine naturalist or a drone enthusiast Titan is the best option for a number of things including capturing stunning underwater videos and images, carrying out accurate technical inspections of underwater equipment or finding the location of abundant fish.
Read More: Sugar.IQ Diabetes Management App Developed By Medtronic And IBM Watson Health Now Commercially Available
Features of Titan
Built-in camera: The camera built-in this underwater drone includes an ultra-wide angle lens of 160 degrees to create detailed and rich spectacular 4K videos and 8mp photos.
Dive filters to correct colors: It includes purple and red dive filters to correct the colours of the videos and photos captured up to the depth of 5-21 metres in fresh or saltwater.
Lights to dive in dark: Powerful LED lights of 1500LM are provided on each side of the camera to allow users to see in the darkest depths of the ocean.
Access to more than 150 meters: The diving range of Titan has been designed to allow dives up to 150 metres deep to explore the mysteries of the ocean and enjoy adventures.
6 thrusters for extremely powerful motion: Titan has won a Red Dot Design award due to its streamlined design and strong thrusters for maneuverability. Along with making it look more artistic these thrusters have also increased its performance with the accuracy of its steering algorithm. They can help users when navigating strong underwater currents by controlling the speed, flexibility and endurance of the Titan.
Flexible interface: There is an extension port underneath Titan that can allow users to add-on exciting features for diving for different purposes.
Easy to carry design: Titan can be carried away easily due to its rolling case-like design.
Easy controls for pilots: The remote controller used in Titan includes a 2.4GHz frequency controller to connect to a tablet or smartphone for viewing underwater. Its 1080p resolution allows users to watch spectacular moments in real time.
Extended battery life: It includes a polymer lithium battery that can allow users at least 4 hours of use after a full charge that lasts 2 hours.
Though people have enjoyed Titan for its underwater camera, company’s experts are of the view that it is designed to provide a next level underwater experience for various other underwater activities. Titan can be used for a number of other underwater activities including recording footage while diving or fishing, research and exploration of shipwrecks, salvage work and professional inspection of aquaculture.
Several KOLs are ready to collaborate with Titan project. The videos of these collaborations will be released in near future.
Read More: Shyft Unveils Board Of Advisors Comprised Of Top Crypto, Industry, And Regulatory Leaders United To Redefine Identity


