Reach Analytics Chosen As Predictive Marketing Partner By V12 Data

23 Mar 2018

Reach Analytics, the leading provider of self-service predictive marketing for brands, agencies and nonprofits today announced a partnership with V12 Data, providing them Reach’s real-time predictive modeling platform.
V12 Data is an omnichannel data powerhouse, and the industry leader in automotive data, who powers the right connections through the right channels at the right time with their market-leading data solutions, real time technologies and powerful analytics.
Due to growing market demand, V12 Data sought to enhance their predictive modeling system to improve the cycle time, from days to minutes, to provide custom audiences particularly in the digital ecosystem. With Reach’s predictive marketing platform, V12 Data will be better able to find net-new customers and identify top responders to optimize and refine omnichannel campaigns over time and drastically improve key metrics like: total customers acquired, campaign response rates, cost of customer acquisition, and overall campaign ROI.
In particular, the predictive platform will allow V12 to greatly improve their offline audience modeling process and convert it from highly manual to a real-time, automated, end-to-end predictive system.
Todd Dziedzic
Reach was chosen from a selection of multiple competitive vendors after a thorough search. V12 conducted reviews of platform architecture and ran tests with live data. After a rigorous analysis, Reach was ultimately chosen because of its real-time modeling, end-to-end automation, use of AI decisioning, best-in-class wrangling and intuitive visual reporting.
“Reach impressed us with their platform as an easy-to-use, automated solution in the cloud, that could tackle all our requirements,” said Todd Dziedzic, VP of Analytics at V12 Data. “To cut cycle time, we needed more than just powerful modeling. We needed a true end-to-end predictive marketing option that also wasn’t heavy and cumbersome to use. Reach fit the bill entirely.”
Bruno Delahaye
Reach’s predictive platform produces ideal consumer and prospect profiles, making prospect information instantly available for download based off of the results. V12 Data customers can now leverage Reach’s predictive marketing platform to rapidly build profiles using their current V12 data and segmentation strategy of choice – per product line, per geography (zip, state or region), per channel, per store, per purchase type (online vs. offline; high average purchase), etc.
“With self-service predictive marketing, V12 is greatly boosting their ability to provide fast, accurate predictive modeling and improve campaign results for clients,” said Bruno Delahaye, CEO at Reach Analytics. “The combination and power of great data and a true end-to-end predictive solution means great results for consumer marketers.”
Reach Analytics’ cloud-based predictive marketing software is available for white label licensing for brands, agencies and nonprofits, and offers eligible partners the ability to plug in any data set and run real-time predictive marketing, using their own first-party data. In minutes, a Reach white label cloud creates profiles with sophisticated data wrangling and state-of-the-art machine learning technology without the need for large teams of data scientists.
Designed for brands, and new customer acquisition, the Reach Analytics predictive intelligence platform lets consumer marketers uncover insights about their customers and find prospects faster, easier and more accurately than ever before.
The Reach predictive cloud offers brands and agencies something they’ve never had access to before—the ability to input data, create predictive profiles and get visual customer and prospect reports and transparent, direct access to consumer data and contact info for your best prospects—all in real-time, without needing to wrangle data or involve data scientists.


