Dell Partners With Meta To Bring Augmented Reality To Industries

22 Jan 2018

The Meta 2 Development Kit Combined With Powerful Dell Precision Technology Will Make AR Innovation More Accessible For Businesses
Dell  announced it will be the first authorized reseller of the Meta 2 Augmented Reality Development Kit, equipping commercial companies with the tools needed to more easily innovate and adopt new AR technology applications that can advance their business. In partnership with Meta, Dell aims to make AR more accessible for business deployment, particularly in healthcare, manufacturing and construction, by providing tools for creating immersive experiences unique to the needs of those industries.
Dell is the only technology provider with an end to end ecosystem to consume, create and power VR and AR. The new offering with Meta stems from Dell’s VR/AR Technology Partner Program, which brings together other innovators in VR and AR to test and collaborate on the best technology solutions for varying applications and experiences. This program allows Dell to help current and potential customers to better navigate the new and rapidly evolving VR/AR ecosystem, by working with partners to verify and certify the best software and hardware solutions for VR and AR applications – bringing standardization where it is needed most.
The Meta 2 Augmented Reality Development Kit will make the Meta AR headset compatible with a number of Dell professional PCs, including Dell Precision workstations and Dell Canvas, as well as bundle the products together for purchase. Among the applications is a Medical Holodeck, which leverages the Dell Canvas and the Meta headset to allow medical professionals to collaborate in AR. Dell is also planning to introduce “AR in a box,” a platform from which channel partners and sales people can show off new Dell Meta AR innovations to potential customers.
Rahul Tikoo
“We’re excited about this new partnership with Meta and the opportunity to further transform industries with AR,” said Rahul Tikoo, Vice President and General Manager, Dell Precision workstations. “There continues to be tremendous potential for VR and AR across various industries and in addition to building technology powerful enough for the job, we’re also committed to working with our innovative partners to make AR more comprehensive and accessible for our commercial customers to explore and adopt.”
The Meta 2 offers the world’s most immersive AR experience with the widest field of view, a powerful optical engine for overlaying photorealistic content, and the ability to virtually manipulate holographic 3D content through touch. It is ideal for the compute-heavy applications required by industrial companies. For example, Meta 2 AR solutions can help engineers visualize and manipulate virtual schematics overlaid on a car or building space under construction; or train new doctors on holographic dummies which would be significantly costlier to replicate in real-life.
Joe Mikhail
“We’re very excited for this partnership with Dell. Dell users will now have the opportunity to get their hands on a seamless AR solution that is considered the best on the market by many,” said Joe Mikhail, Chief Revenue Officer, Meta. “This is a major element of Meta’s ecosystem development initiatives. We are certain our partnership with Dell will deliver our game-changing technology into many creative hands and drive productivity measures to both developers and corporates alike.”
Availability
The Meta 2 Augmented Reality Development Kit will be available for sale on Dell.com starting on February 15 for $1,495which includes:
Meta 2 AR Headset
Access to Unity SDK (Beta)
Access to Meta Developer Center
Headset Stand
2 Exchangeable Forehead Supports
2 Handwashable Forehead Support Pads
Microfiber Bag
AC Adapter
Universal Adapter Plug Kit – Set of 4
Access to Detailed Instructions
With award-winning desktops, laptops, 2-in-1s and thin clients, powerful workstations and rugged devices made for specialized environments, monitors, endpoint security solutions and services, Dell gives today’s workforce what they need to securely connect, produce, and collaborate from anywhere at any time. Dell, a part of Dell Technologies, services customers from consumers to organizations of all sizes across 180 countries with the industry’s most comprehensive and innovative end-user portfolio.


