Silicon Valley Technology Veteran Bala Joshi Joins Hotify AI As Advisor

20 Feb 2018

Joshi Plans to Chair an AI Council in Silicon Valley That Connects Enterprises And Startups Helping Build An AI Ecosystem To Solve Real-World AI Problems
Hotify AI, a leading Enterprise AI Solutions & Cognitive Intelligence Platforms Provider, announced Mr. Bala K Joshi, joining as Member of Advisory Board and business development head for North America. Bala’s vast experience in enterprises business will help Hotify to further scale up business in US market.
Commenting on the association with Hotify.ai, Bala Joshi, currently, Chairman & CEO, Bala Joshi Group, said, “I was impressed with the talent and vision of the Hotify team. I am excited for the opportunity to be an advisor to the company as well as part of the Hotify team to help grow the business in the North America region. As one of the first steps in this journey I have agreed to start and chair an AI council in Silicon Valley that connects Enterprises and Startups helping build an AI ecosystem to solve real-world AI problems.”
Ankur Dinesh Garg
Speaking on the announcement, Ankur Dinesh Garg, Founder & CEO, Hotify AI, said, “Bala’s addition to Hotify is a great success for us and validation of our viability. Technology veterans like Bala, bring significant trust from enterprises and give us great exposure in markets like the US, This is just a start for us, we have many more exciting milestones to come in future with regards to our foray in North America.”
While welcoming Bala Joshi to the Hotify global family and to its leadership team, Ramesh Kumar, Co-Founder & COO, Hotify AI, said, “To get a strong validation and a resounding endorsement from such a respected Silicon Valley luminary like Bala is truly a humbling moment and a feather in our cap.” He further added, “At a personal level, I have had the pleasure of having a ringside seat in watching and interacting with Bala and his superior intellect and strong value based endearing personality from our RECT / NITT Trichy days and later in our Silicon Valley days.”
The potential contribution of AI to the global economy is estimated to be over $15+ Trillion by 2030 and give 14.5% ($3.7 Trillion) GDP boost to North America. Hence, to accelerate its USA penetration and to serve the North American market, Hotify AI setup operations in Silicon Valley starting in January 2018. Hotify AI has been making in-roads through partnerships in creating a robust partner ecosystem as well as acquiring enterprise customers in the USA. Over past one year, Hotify has evolved partnerships in east and west coast, with active conversations with some of the leading enterprises of USA in Retail, Automotive and BFSI Sector.
Hotify AI is a cognitive intelligence platform, accelerating enablement of enterprise AI solutions and is headquartered in Bangalore, India. Hotify AI has a seasoned leadership team with hands-on experience across a wide range of AI domains and deep expertise in Artificial Intelligence. Hotify AI is presently working with leading enterprises in banking, financial services, manufacturing and consumer packaged goods companies. Hotify AI’s platform provides an out-of-the-box ready-to-use AI backend, designed to accelerate development of intelligent systems and increase AI adoption. Hotify AI also offers AI advisory, consulting, and develops solutions that organizations may require as they work toward the adoption of AI.


