Positron Announces Funding Deal For Next Generation Of Cinematic VR Chair

30 Jan 2018

Positron That it Has Closed a $1.4 Million Seed Funding Deal to Further Develop The Next Generation of Voyager, its Flagship VR Exhibition and Distribution Platform
Positron announced at the Sundance Film Festival that it has closed a $1.4 million seed funding deal to further develop the next generation of Voyager, its flagship VR exhibition and distribution platform. Additionally, Positron and Ralph Smyth Entertainment will co-produce an original VR series made exclusively for Voyager, its full-motion cinematic VR chair. The deal was struck with Cathleen Ihasz and Nicole Ihasz, Co-Founders of Lazar Ventures, and OWC during the festival.
As a 2018 Official Provider of Sundance Institute, Positron’s Voyager VR chair platform was used exclusively at Sundance 2018 to debut the world premiere of SPACE EXPLORERS: A NEW DAWN, a new VR experience from Felix & Paul Studios, made in collaboration with NASA. The prototype of Voyager premiered at Sundance 2017 last year, and went on to become the platform used by Universal Pictures and IMAX for THE MUMMY ZERO GRAVITY STUNT VR EXPERIENCE with Tom Cruise.
Jeffrey Travis
“Voyager represents the future of cinematic VR entertainment, and we are thrilled to have the support of so many creatives to propel a standard platform for location-based entertainment that gives audiences and creators a premium experience,” said Jeffrey Travis, CEO of Positron. “This investment will allow us to further develop our Voyager platform to include state-of-the-art features such as interactivity, 6 DoF tracking, scent, wind, and AI motion tracking”, added Jennifer Rundell, COO and co-founder.
“Nicole and I experienced the VR exhibit at Sundance this year and were blown away by the technology and content. We are thrilled to be part of this next phase of development and all that lies ahead for Voyager,” said Cathleen Ihasz, Co-Founder, Lazar Ventures.
Larry O’Connor
Larry O’Connor, Founder & CEO, Other World Computing, Inc. (OWC), said “OWC has served the Motion Picture industry worldwide since 1988. Our goal has always been to create groundbreaking products for the creative professionals. We are thrilled to support what we feel is the future of cinematic VR. There is a whole new world of creative coming to be and I am excited to see OWC and OWC technology powering the way.”
In a statement from co-production partner Ralph Smyth Entertainment about the upcoming VR series with Positron, the company said “After experiencing how Positron and their Voyager have revolutionized the world of Virtual Reality we’re beyond thrilled to work with Positron and OWC to co-produce original content that will push the boundaries of technology and experiential storytelling.”
Voyager VR chairs will be coming to cinemas, VR centers, hotels, museums and airports later this year as part of the launch of the Voyager Network, an out-of-home distribution network for premium VR. “Several content studios are already in development and production on cinematic VR projects specifically targeted for the Voyager platform, and those titles will be announced soon,” added Travis.
Positron is a VR technology studio based in Los Angeles that is focused on transforming the way people experience VR. The team includes mechatronics engineers, designers, software developers and artists who collaborate together to create premium VR experiences and products. Voyager is the first full-motion chair platform designed for cinematic VR. For more information and Voyager images please visit Positron Media.


