What Can You Learn From The Intelligent Automation Nordic Summit?

19 Apr 2018

How Your Company Can Combine Robotics With AI To Remain Competitive Through This New Digital Evolution. Meet The Experts
There’re calling it the go-to event for automation professionals in Scandinavia, the Baltics and Northern Europe. Intelligent Automation Nordics: RPA & AI Summit 2018 is the leading automation event in the Nordic region. It is part of the wider Intelligent Automation series, with over 10 events worldwide, organized by IQPC.
The summit, due to begin on the 23 – 25 April at the Radisson Blu Scandinavia Hotel in Copenhagen, Denmark, will be in its second year of existence.
Global revenues from cognitive systems are predicted to surge past $47 billion in 2020, according to New IDC Spending Guide. Across the Nordics, organizations are ramping up Robotic Process Automation and looking to leverage it beyond the breakeven point, creating tangible returns. With this new technology comes a complex set of questions and no guidebook for success. How can you scale up your RPA to create greater business bene­fits?
Which processes will bring you the greatest returns? How can you set up a robust system that the entire business can trust? At the Intelligent Automation Nordic Summit, you will ­find out what constitutes best practice, taking on the lessons learned from 60+ industry thought leaders.
Influential Nordic organisations taking to the stage include Maersk, Skat, Danica Pension, Danske Bank, Nykredit, Orsted, Statoil, Stena Line, Ericsson, Carlsberg, Arla, Telenor, City of Helsinki and Lantmäteriet. Overall, 60 senior automation experts will be taking to the stage, leading 55 insight and thought-provoking sessions, from case studies to intimate interactive discussion groups.
Here’s what you can expect from the three-day summit;
Nordea speaking on combining cognitive systems with your robots to take automation to the next level
RPA and AI in the public sector: the Migri experience – the Finnish Immigration Service
DFDS on Smart data analytics to improve processes and increase revenue
Statoil and TDC discuss the RPA journey: practical advice for starting up quickly
Danica Pension on creating and maintaining a culture of ownership in your RPA team
Creating reliable virtual assistants that enhance the customer experience with If P&C Insurance
GKN Aerospace, City of Copenhagen and Stena Line debate the AI business case: the benefits versus the risks of moving to cognitive systems
Here’s our list of interesting speakers and what they are working on;
Mattias Fras, Group Head of Robotics Strategy and Innovation, Nordea Bank
What You Can Learn:  Combining cognitive systems with your robots to take automation to the next level
What business advantages can come out of combining self-learning, analytical tools with robotics? How can it improve the customer journey?  
How do you prepare for the linking of cognitive systems with your RPA?
Can you plug AI tools into existing processes or do you need to teach your developers new capabilities?
External support, organisational changes and capabilities you will require to implement intelligent automation or machine learning on top of your robots
Sami Aherva, Director, Stara Logistics
What You Can Learn:  Applying RPA to judgement-driven business control actions: value adding through RPA in these activities
What are the outer limits of this technology in terms of intelligent decision making?
How to minimize risk when rolling out RPA into areas that require judgement rather than following simple rules?
Do we need additional tools to do this?
Henrik Göthberg, Director Group Financial Systems, Vattenfall
What You Can Learn:  The AI business case: the benefits versus the risks of moving to cognitive systems
What level of automation is possible with intelligent systems?
What value and insights can you unlock from your unstructured data? What business benefit can be draw from it?
Key risk factors involved in adopting cognitive technologies before they reach a state of maturity
Developing and retaining AI talent to avoid risking future reliance on support from outside Scandinavia
Jakub Wozniak, Head of Process Automation, A.P. Moller – Maersk
What You Can Learn:  Determining what RPA can realistically do for your business
What level of automation is possible with intelligent systems?
What value and insights can you unlock from your unstructured data? What business benefit can be draw from it?
Key risk factors involved in adopting cognitive technologies before they reach a state of maturity
Developing and retaining AI talent to avoid risking future reliance on support from outside Scandinavia
Nabeel Babree, Head of Business Process Excellence, Telenor
What You Can Learn:  HR automation: what is possible using today’s available technology?
On-boarding new employees: building a solid workflow for a self-service catalogue
Industry experiences of automating within the recruitment area: how good are robots at short-listing the best candidates?
Opportunities and potential pitfalls involved in robotising Learning and Development tasks and other areas within HR
Per Arne Nilsen, Head of Robotics, Business Transformation, Telia
What You Can Learn:  Running a successful RPA piloting programme
A practical overview of the main considerations you will need to work through during your RPA piloting phase. The main topics we will work through include:
How to efficiently analyse processes across your organisation to identify a pipeline of potential candidates for automation
Examples from different industries: which pilots have laid the most solid foundations for an RPA rollout?
The business side: which projects will help to create the greatest internal confidence in robotics, in the areas where cooperation will be needed the most?
What frameworks can you use for setting realistic goals and timeframes for a pilot project?
Technology selection for a pilot: differentiating between the vendors, and assessing subscription and licencing options to minimise financial risk
Bringing the relevant department on board with the project, gaining trust from the leadership and employees
Tove Hejbøl Lindquist, Director of Process Excellence, Copenhagen Airport
What You Can Learn:  The robots are coming! How to succeed in RPA change management
Setting up change management for an RPA rollout: should it be managed centrally or locally?
How is RPA changing the work within organisations and the people aspects you should take into consideration when starting a programme
Successful approaches for building trust and cooperation with stakeholders from different parts of the business
Communicating your success stories across an international organisation with different departments and processes to win ongoing support
Frida Hanson, Project Leader Automation, Essity
What You Can Learn:  Scaling up RPA: industry experiences of the decentralised and Centre of Excellence models
Setting up change management for an RPA rollout: should it be managed centrally or locally?
How is RPA changing the work within organisations and the people aspects you should take into consideration when starting a programme
Successful approaches for building trust and cooperation with stakeholders from different parts of the business
Communicating your success stories across an international organisation with different departments and processes to win ongoing support
Jenny Dahlström, Senior Vice President, Deputy Head of Business Support and Development HCX, Handelsbanken
What You Can Learn:  How organisations are leveraging RPA and AI to ensure they remain competitive in the long term
Where does the true business value lie? Are industries focusing on cost savings or are we looking to RPA to underpin growth?
How do intelligent automation and other cognitive systems fit into the digital agenda?
What return should business leaders expect from robotics deployment and in what timeframe?
Building a strategic roadmap versus taking an exploratory, agile approach to RPA and AI: what benefits are organisations seeing from each approach?
Mikkel Folmø, Head of Analytics, City of Copenhagen
What You Can Learn:  The AI business case: the benefits versus the risks of moving to cognitive systems
What level of automation is possible with intelligent systems?
What value and insights can you unlock from your unstructured data? What business benefit can be draw from it?
Key risk factors involved in adopting cognitive technologies before they reach a state of maturity
Developing and retaining AI talent to avoid risking future reliance on support from outside Scandinavia


