Botkeeper Appoints Doug Sleeter To Board Of Advisors

23 Feb 2018

Accounting Industry Innovator calls botkeeper “Next Big Thing” in Bookkeeping
botkeeper, the first automated bookkeeping solution, today announced it has strengthened its Board of Advisors with the appointment of Doug Sleeter, the founder and CEO of The Sleeter Group, an international network of accounting software consultants, and the former producer of SleeterCon, an annual conference and tradeshow for accounting professionals.
Sleeter, a passionate leader of innovation and change in the small business accounting industry, joins botkeeper to advance its market leadership and goal of redefining modern accounting best practices among growing, entrepreneurial businesses.
Doug Sleeter
“I am excited to join botkeeper at a time when business accounting is undergoing fundamental change driven by automation, dedicated machine learning (ML), and artificial intelligence (AI),” said Sleeter. “botkeeper is innovating the bookkeeping functions with new technology that leverages computer science techniques to eliminate the inefficiencies, complexities, and prohibitive costs inherent in traditional bookkeeping processes and tasks. This represents a huge opportunity for new and growing businesses.”
Bookkeeping is an important, yet historically very manual business process. It’s time-consuming, expensive, and error-prone; often eliminating a company’s ability to see – and act on – cross-functional trends impacting the overall business. Hundreds of botkeeper customers save money and time by automating bookkeeping tasks through a blend of dedicated ML, AI, and human assistance. As these companies grow, botkeeper scales with them while still offering significant savings over alternatives.
A CPA firm veteran and former Apple Computer Evangelist, Sleeter has partnered his two great passions – accounting and technology – to guide developers in the innovation of new products and to educate and lead accounting professionals who serve small businesses. In 2017, he was inducted into The CPA Practice Advisor Hall of Fame in the accounting profession. He has also been named to Accounting Today’s “Top 100 Most Influential People in Accounting” eight times.
Enrico Palmerino
“It is a considerable understatement to say that Doug Sleeter has impacted the accounting industry,” said Enrico Palmerino, CEO at botkeeper. “He has helped shape the very nature of the field and driven development of innovative technologies and practices that will be with us for many years to come. I am truly honored to have Doug as an Advisor.”
Sleeter joins Hap Klopp, founder of The North Face; Jeff Avallon, founder of Idea Paint; and Jordan Fliegel, founder of Coach Up & Draft, on the botkeeper Board of Advisors. He attended both the University of California Santa Cruz and Santa Clara University and holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Computer Information Systems.
botkeeper provides growing businesses with a robotic bookkeeper that automates bookkeeping and accounting tasks using machine learning (ML), artificial intelligence (AI), and human assistance. Hundreds of leading-edge companies trust botkeeper for round-the-clock accounting services that save them time and money and allow them to focus on growing their businesses.
Read More: Prophesee Announces Initial Closing Of $19M Funding


