SAIC Appoints Two New Senior Leaders

28 Jun 2018

Company names Christopher Donaghey as head of Corporate Development and Tom Eldridge as head of Strategic Development and Communications
Science Applications International Corp. today announced the appointment of Christopher Donaghey as senior vice president of Corporate Development and Tom Eldridge as senior vice president of Strategic Development and Communications, both effective immediately. Donaghey will report to CEO Tony Moraco and Eldridge will report to Chief Operating Officer Nazzic Keene.
“Chris has been a valuable team member for the past year. His expertise in government services and his knowledge of emerging technologies and capital markets are an asset to our organization”
Follow Us
Corporate Development
As head of Corporate Development, Donaghey will be responsible for executing the company’s mergers and acquisitions (M&A) strategy. He will work closely with the senior management team to support the development and implementation of SAIC’s strategic plan with an emphasis on M&A to complement organic growth strategies and value creation.
Previously, Donaghey was senior vice president of finance for SAIC’s operations and provided strategic leadership and business guidance to the organization.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
Tony Moraco
“Chris has been a valuable team member for the past year. His expertise in government services and his knowledge of emerging technologies and capital markets are an asset to our organization,” said Moraco. “We are pleased to welcome Chris to our executive leadership team and know that his experience thus far with SAIC and in his previous corporate development roles are a great fit for this position.”
Prior to joining SAIC, Donaghey was vice president of Corporate Strategy and Development for KeyW Corporation, a national security solutions provider for the Intelligence, Cyber and Counterterrorism Communities, where he guided the overall corporate strategy, M&A, and capital markets activities. Donaghey was also a senior research analyst for SunTrust Robinson Humphrey Capital Markets where he provided investment advice and insight to institutional investors covering public defense technology, government IT services, and commercial aerospace industries.
Read More: Think Next: Microsoft For Startups China Enables Chinese Innovations To “Go Global” And Overseas Innovations To “Go China”
Donaghey earned his bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering from Texas Tech University and served as an officer in the U.S. Navy.
Strategic Development & Communications
Strategic Development and Communications will unite the existing functions of Business Development, Communications, Government Affairs, and the Office of Technology. Eldridge will be responsible for market intelligence, including technology, funding, and policy trends; strategy support and business development; sales enablement with related tools and processes; internal and external communications, marketing communications, and corporate social responsibility.
“Tom is a proven leader and an asset to our company,” said Keene. “This newly formed organization enhances our strategy execution and business growth as external markets continue to evolve. I am confident the consolidation of these organizations into one will result in a stronger, more integrated team focused on continuing our positive momentum.”
Read More: Deloitte Government Human Capital Trends Reveal Need For Greater C-Suite Collaboration
Currently, Eldridge leads SAIC’s Government Affairs office, where he has overseen several strategic initiatives including establishing the Technology Integration Gateway facility in Cookeville, Tennessee, and overseeing the evolution of the company’s strategy, known as Ingenuity 2025.
Eldridge joined SAIC in 2009 following a distinguished career in the federal government, which included serving on the staff of the National Security Council, and as staff director for the U.S. Special Envoy for Middle East Regional Security at the U.S. Department of State. He also served on the Commission on the National Guard and Reserves, was a senior counsel for the U.S. Senate Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee, and was counsel for the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States (“9/11 Commission”). Eldridge also spent more than a decade serving as a federal and county prosecutor.
Read More: Quanergy Solid State LiDAR Wins Juniper Research Top Automotive Award


