CHAINCREATOR Is Launching A Blockchain & Crypto Ecosystem, Designed To Fit The Needs For Trustworthy ICOs

09 May 2018

The ICO Industry’s Two Biggest Problems Are; The Massive Prevalence Of ICO Exit Scams For Which No Systemic Solution Has Been Found To Date, And The Continuous Refusal Of Crypto Exchanges To List
CHAINCREATOR is an ecosystem of technologically advanced services developed for the global blockchain and crypto industry, designed to fit the needs for launching successful and trustworthy ICOs.
The ICO industry’s two biggest problems are: 
1) the massive prevalence of ICO exit scams for which no systemic solution has been found to date
2) the continuous refusal of crypto exchanges to list coins resulting in those coins having zero market valuation as a consequence of the absence of any trading and liquidity activity resulting in contributors’ frustration
CHAINCREATOR MARKET has solved the first problem by creating an escrow-based ICO platform for trustworthy ICOs. This means that all the funds raised during the ICOs are stored in a secure escrow account. These funds will be gradually released, subject to third-party verification to the ICOs based on achieving milestones agreed during their campaign. In this way, we promote a safe environment for both contributors and ICOs.
This service will make it impossible for scammers to cash out the funds, therefore providing contributors with 100% guarantee on their contributions. Thanks to CHAINCREATOR MARKET, all ICOs listed will benefit from a Third Party Trust Guarantee.
A recent study by Satis Group indicates that 80% of the ICOs turned out to be scams, and only 8% of them are actually getting listed on an Exchange. This makes ICOs extremely risky both for contributors and founders.
Tunde Vass, Co-Founder of CHAINCREATOR argues that: “Finally, with one master stroke of CHAINCREATOR, the ICO community will now be able to securely and safely contribute in ICOs going forward, no longer having to deal with the ICO exit scam risks.”
CHAINCREATOR is also solving the second major problem, by giving all ICO tokens sold on the platform a guaranteed listing on CHAINCREATOR EXCHANGE solving the problem of token liquidity and obtaining the associated market capital valuation.
CHAINCREATOR EXCHANGE is a token-friendly platform where professional brokers and token buyers can easily trade their digital assets. Tokens created within the CHAINCREATOR ecosystem will be tradeable on the CHAINCREATOR EXCHANGE along will other global cryptocurrencies.
The CHAINCREATOR EXCHANGE is a secure, protected and insured crypto exchange, using state-of-the-art vault technology.
The straightforward and easy-to-use features of CHAINCREATOR MARKET platform allow non-technical founders to launch their ICOs by completing a simple form to generate their ERC Token in combination with a smart contract. Contributors are able to participate in supporting ICOs similar to how people can join a Kickstarter funding project.
Tunde Vass states: “ICO made simple and available to everyone. All technicalities regarding the ICO crowdsale are being handled seamlessly and frictionless with Swiss precision by the CHAINCREATOR platform.” ICOs from all industries across the world can apply to get listed on the CHAINCREATOR.MARKET and the associated CHAINCREATOR.EXCHANGE
The submitted ICOs should have their team formed, a strong business framework ready including a valid whitepaper and working website when submitting their project.
CHAINCREAT OR technologies are built in order to accommodate the needs of contributors and facilitate the processes in a clear and easy to use way. Our products are built around the real need of both the contributors and the market in order to foster a safe environment for the ICO community.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World


