Kenna Security’s Chief Data Scientist Joins Forbes Technology Council

20 Feb 2018

Michael Roytman Named to Invitation-Only Community of World-Class CIOs, CTOs and Technology Executives
Kenna Security, a leader in predictive cyber risk, announced today that Chief Data Scientist Michael Roytman has been named a member of the Forbes Technology Council, a community for world-class CIOs, CTOs and technology executives.
Roytman joins other Forbes Technology Council members, who are hand-selected, to become part of a curated network of successful peers and share their technology expertise with Forbes audiences.
Michael Roytman
“I’m honored to be a part of the Forbes Technology Council and recognized among this community of leaders and pioneers in technology,” said Michael Roytman, Chief Data Scientist, Kenna Security. “A data science-driven approach to cyber security can benefit organizations of all sizes, across all industries, and I look forward to sharing my perspective on that approach through the Forbes media channels.”
As Kenna Security’s Chief Data Scientist, Michael Roytman is responsible for building the company’s core analytics functionality focusing on security metrics, risk measurement, and vulnerability measurement. Named one of Forbes’ 30 under 30, Roytman has co-founded organizations such as Dharma.ai, a cloud-based data management platform, and TruckSpotting, a mobile app for tracking food trucks. He also serves as an advisor to CryptoMove, a moving target defense startup. In addition to these roles, Roytman chairs the Board of Dharma.ai and is a board member and program director at the Society of Information Risk Analysts (SIRA).
Scott Gerber
Scott Gerber, founder of Forbes Councils, says, “We are honored to welcome Michael Roytman into the community. Our mission with Forbes Councils is to curate successful professionals from every industry, creating a vetted, social capital-driven network that helps every member make an even greater impact on the business world.”
Forbes partnered with the founders of Young Entrepreneur Council (YEC) to launch Forbes Councils, invitation-only communities for world-class business professionals in a variety of industries. Members, who are hand-selected by each Council’s community team, receive personalized introductions to each other based on their specific needs and gain access to a wide range of business benefits and services, including best-in-class concierge teams, personalized connections, peer-to-peer learning, a business services marketplace, and the opportunity to share thought leadership content on Forbes.com.
Kenna Security is a leader in predictive cyber risk. The Kenna Security Platform enables organizations to work cross-functionally to determine and remediate cyber risks. Kenna leverages Cyber Risk Context Technology to track and predict real-world exploitations, focusing security teams on what matters most. Headquartered in San Francisco, Kenna counts among its customers many Fortune 100 companies, and serves nearly every major vertical.
Read More: Interview With Tomer Kashi, Co-Founder & CEO, SkyWatch


