KLAS: Health Catalyst Merits High Satisfaction For Population Health Management Technology Among IDNs And CINs

18 Jan 2018

Health Catalyst Was Particularly Highly Rated By The Report For Its Capabilities In Data Aggregation
KLAS Research gave Health Catalyst a score of 89.0* for overall performance in a report released, “Population Health Management 2017, Part 2: Balancing Collaboration And Functionality.”
The new report especially highlighted Health Catalyst for its ability to “cater to the more complex needs” of large health systems that qualify as Integrated Delivery Networks (IDNs) and Clinically Integrated Networks (CINs), specifically the “data-focused verticals” of population health management (PHM). The report also noted Health Catalyst’s strong commitment to collaborating with customers and “working closely to help customers manage their PHM goals and priorities.”
In developing its report, KLAS gathered feedback from 179 provider organizations to assess the performance of the top 23 PHM vendors.  Following its first population health management report in October 2017, this latest KLAS report focused on asking participants to rate their vendors’ core competencies in six areas: data aggregation, data analysis, care management, administrative/financial reporting, patient engagement, and clinician engagement.
Data Aggregation Capabilities Stand Out
Health Catalyst was particularly highly rated by the report for its capabilities in data aggregation, which KLAS calls “the jumping off point for assembling a population health management strategy.” According to KLAS, Health Catalyst has “a strong focus on accommodating the kinds of data that each customer wants to bring in, helping customers bring in unique data feeds, and then being vigilant about quality control and merging that data successful.”
Due to the “high quality” of its data, Health Catalyst is “also used by customers to create longitudinal patient records with their data, which is more easily done when vendors bring all the different pieces together and work closely with customers to help them identify their top PHM priorities going forward,” KLAS said. Health Catalyst customers reported that the company collaborates to understand their data aggregation needs and then customizes its approach accordingly.
Many Health Catalyst customers interviewed for the report noted the company’s commitment to collaboration. “I am highly satisfied with Health Catalyst because they actually work with us,” said one Health Catalyst customer quoted by KLAS. “Health Catalyst Analytics is not just a software product or something that is one size fits all. Health Catalyst actually works with their customers to customize the data aggregation for their customers’ processes. That is a big differentiator between Health Catalyst and other vendors that we work with.”
Helping Health Systems Take on Risk
Another PHM vertical where Health Catalyst stands out, according to KLAS, is administrative and financial reporting, which is “most important for large health systems that choose to take on risk” and that “need sophisticated risk-prediction and performance reporting tools.”
Health Catalyst provides the “level of flexibility and collaboration” that health systems need to succeed with administrative/financial reporting, which requires “vendors that are responsive and are capable of handling complexity and customization,” according to the report. In this area, Health Catalyst’s customers “highlight how their systems simplify the analytics and make them digestible so that managers can get the information they need.”
Among Health Catalyst’s customers, its data analysis and administrative/financial functionalities are just as deeply deployed as its data aggregation functionality, the report found. “This speaks to the strength of the platform Health Catalyst provides and the fact that it is easy for users to tweak the data and set it up just the way they want it,” the report continued.
Driving Tangible Outcomes
KLAS also rated Health Catalyst for its ability to “drive tangible outcomes*.” Health Catalyst works with healthcare organizations to understand and drive improvement outcomes and to sustain those outcomes over time.
*limited data collected
The company’s experience in improving clinical, financial and operational outcomes for clients is demonstrated by its nearly 140 published case studies.
KLAS further commented that Health Catalyst “does well at developing new tools,” a recognition of the company’s $200 million investment in developing new analytics applications that leverage the Health Catalyst Data Operating System (DOS™). DOS simplifies the sharing, analysis and availability of information from multiple data systems to improve clinical, financial and operational outcomes. The platform includes a vast suite of products and analytic accelerators, optimized with artificial intelligence (AI) and natural language processing to enhance health system performance.
KLAS also asked respondents “yes/no” questions to evaluate their opinion of Health Catalyst in four areas*:
100% of respondents said Health Catalyst “keeps all promises”
100% of respondents said Health Catalyst is part of their long-term plans
100% of respondents said Health Catalyst “avoids nickel and diming”
92% of respondents said they would buy Health Catalyst again
Dan Burton
“We appreciate the comprehensive research completed by KLAS and we are honored that their independent review highlighted our clients’ successes in utilizing our platform and applications for population health management,” said Dan Burton, CEO of Health Catalyst. “Our clients’ success and satisfaction are the fundamental ways we measure our effectiveness.  We’re grateful to see third-party validation from KLAS that this is consistently occurring.”


