CX And AI In Harmony: Oracle To Deliver AI-Powered CX Via Oracle CX Cloud Suite

10 Apr 2018

There’re plenty of actions at the Oracle Modern CX making the top stories of the week. Today, the actions got thicker with new updates getting announced for the Oracle Customer Experience (CX) Cloud Suite. The addition of a host of new innovations are aimed at helping customer service, commerce, sales, and marketing professionals accommodate the dynamic expectations of the modern-day customers. The innovations include enhancements in AI-based applications, video, voice, search, and data analytics to help the connected substratum of digital enterprise.
Today, customer expectations continue to topple CX even though there’s a strong focus on customers.
CX performance of 30% of companies is expected to recede which will, in turn, lead to net losses (Forrester)
This is where the Oracle CX Cloud Suite enables users in easy navigation through the complexities and quick adoption of the announced innovations. This will help users make advancements in their careers and deliver CX which is in tandem with the tangible, predictable business results.
Des Cahill
Des Cahill, Head CX Evangelist and VP, Oracle, spoke to us just before the premier Oracle event. He said, “Marketing is rapidly evolving from just being a creative process to being a data-driven process.”
Regarding the latest announcement, Des added, “While the challenges we all face are a little different from department to department or company to company, the common theme for all customer experience professionals is how to lead change, not just react to it.”
According to Des, technology alone can’t be considered as an answer to manage the mentioned wave of change. He believes that Oracle is focused on helping its customers eliminate the barriers that limit their employees in delivering epic CX.
“The latest innovations within Oracle CX Cloud Suite will empower marketing, sales, commerce, and customer service professionals to lead the changes and advance their careers,” says Des.
Here’s a brief of some of the innovations announced for the Oracle CX Cloud Suite.
Innovations in Marketing:
Behavioral insights in real time
A scalable, powerful platform for loyalty management
AIM orchestration
Ad optimization
Improved campaigns
Innovation in Sales:
New AI-based sales capabilities
AI-powered deal management
Capabilities for complex quotas in territory management
Virtual assistant for sales
Dashboards to monitor campaign effectiveness
Innovation in Commerce:
AI-powered search capabilities
AI-powered customer acquisition capabilities
Integrations for ISV partner networks
Innovations in Customer Service:
Virtual assistant
Video chat
The Oracle CX Cloud Suite is a part of Oracle Cloud Applications which accredits organizations in taking a more intelligent approach to managing CX and initiatives revolving around transformation. The suite allows customers to ease IT complexity, achieve tangible and predictable business results, and most importantly, deliver innovative CX. All of this is made possible through a platform that combines data, experiences, and results.


