Cellula Robotics Awarded National Oceanography Center STEMM-CCS Contract

06 Jul 2018

Instrumented Test Site As Part Of The European Union H2020 Programme “Strategies For The Environmental Monitoring Of Marine Carbon Capture And Storage”
The contract covers the design, build, testing and offshore support of a tool to place a seven-meter curved pipe into the seabed. This tool will be used to enable the controlled injection of CO2 at an instrumented test site as part of the European Union H2020 programme “Strategies for the environmental monitoring of marine carbon capture and storage” (STEMM-CCS)
Cellula Robotics Ltd. (Cellula) has been awarded a contract from the National Oceanography Center (NOC) in the UK. The contract covers the design, build, testing and offshore support of a tool to place a seven-meter curved pipe into the seabed. This tool will be used to enable the controlled injection of CO2 at an instrumented test site as part of the European Union H2020 programme “Strategies for the environmental monitoring of marine carbon capture and storage” (STEMM-CCS).
Read More: Working Together To Strengthen The Lives Of Rural Americans
This contract will leverage Cellula’s experience with seafloor geotechnical drills and remotely operated subsea equipment to provide a bespoke solution to NOC. The project is expected to be completed in Q1 2019, with a deployment in the North Sea following in early Q2.
Cellula Robotics Ltd., based in Burnaby, Canada, is a world-leading engineering solutions company that specializes in the turnkey design and production of seafloor intervention and subsea robotic systems. Cellula is a world leading supplier for seafloor drills, including the field-proven CRD100. Cellula has also developed a range of autonomous underwater vehicles, including Imotus-1, a hovering vehicle capable of SLAM navigation in confined spaces and residence operation from a dock in open water.
STEMM-CCS is an ambitious multi-disciplinary project that will deliver new approaches, methodologies and tools for the safe operation of offshore carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) sites. CCS is a powerful mitigation strategy for addressing the increasing levels of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere. The storage of CO2 in underground reservoirs, for example in depleted oil and gas fields or aquifers, is a demonstrated technology on land and – to a more limited extent – in marine systems. STEMM-CCS will develop approaches to help ensure we select appropriate marine storage sites and can monitor them effectively, thus further increasing confidence in CCS as a viable option for reducing atmospheric CO2.
Read More: MoCo Is World’s First To Combine Blockchain, AI, VR, And Video And Data Compression In One Platform


