Blockchain Technology To Disrupt Internet Of Things (IoT) And Artificial Intelligence (AI) Platforms

16 Jun 2018

It’s Predicted That By 2030, AI Infrastructure Alone Will Be Responsible For Adding Over Us$15 Trillion To The Global Economy
Blockchain and artificial intelligence (AI) as well as Internet of Things (IoT) are now forming a new and innovative fusion for upending business operations across all industries in ways not seen before. This newest fusion into the AI and IoT world is believed to enable enterprises in creating dynamic, integrated business solutions and more importantly creating the possibility for delivering services faster and more securely. In fact, it’s predicted that by 2030, AI infrastructure alone will be responsible for adding over US$15 trillion to the global economy. Blockchain technology operationalizes data, though instead of being dependent on it, blockchain serves as a distributed ledger on which data can be stored and encrypted. The result is a decentralized and secured database that is impervious to change. Active tech companies in the markets this week include Gopher Protocol Inc., Parateum Corporation, Seven Stars Cloud Group Inc, Xunlei Ltd., NXT-ID Inc..
Gopher Protocol, a company specializing in the creation of Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial Intelligence enabled mobile technologies, is pleased to announce that is has launched a blockchain division to support and extend its multiple technology efforts. The blockchain division will focus on the use blockchain solutions to manage multiple lines of business and operate them with “distributed ledger” blockchain technology (DLT) as the underlying technology.
Read More: Interview With Kalin Stoyanchev, Head Of Blockchain + RNDR Project Lead
This technology allows digital information to be distributed, but not copied. That means each individual piece of data can only have one owner. It has also been described as a “digital ledger” stored in a distributed network, the information is constantly reconciled into the database, which is stored in multiple locations and updated instantly. That means the records are public and verifiable. Since there is no central location, it is harder to hack as the info exists simultaneously in millions of locations.
The blockchain will also seek to create partnerships with groups seeking to use Gopher technology for tokenizing tangible, valuable assets to be coupled with blockchain technology to store data and provide transaction history. The focus will be to provide traceability of data, tangible and proven value of an assets and scalable technologies supported by distributed processing capabilities.
Danny Rittman
“We believe a business model combining blockchain with Gopher’s already developed network technologies provides promise to the IoT (Internet of Things) industry and that our expertise in AI and IoT will provide us with the ability to enter this industry with a focus on the tokenization of tangible assets as well as other groundbreaking capabilities that can be achieved through the utilization of blockchain technology” stated Dr. Danny Rittman, CTO of Gopher.
Other recent and current developments in the tech industry include:
Parateum Corporation recently announced that an established provider of pre-paid communications plans has selected Pareteum’s Managed Service Platform with a $6 million agreement over 3 years. This global mobile service provider will use Pareteum’s Managed Service Platform (MSP) as a single source for metering, rating, provisioning and delivery, billing and collection services, as they expand their reach into the US and the Caribbean. The provider, and their customers, will benefit from Pareteum’s Insights Engine, which will collect and interpret predictive analytics to create a variety of tailored service packages, designed specifically to suit the needs of their customers.
Read More: Avionos Releases New Data Revealing How Consumer Expectations Are Driving Retail Strategies
Seven Stars Cloud Group Inc. recently announced a Joint Venture (“JV”) with The Centre for Digital Revolution (C4DR). The JV will establish and develop the premier global standards of issuance, sales and distribution of digital assets, with operations out of the U.K. and mainland Europe. The JV will focus on developing and executing the highest level of compliance and institution-grade best practices in: 1. Compliant digital asset issuance and private sales; 2. Initial Exchange Offering (“IEO”) of digital assets; 3. Digital asset clearance networks; 4. Multi-platform exchange syndication and trading. The JV will operate within, and be one component of, the previously announced NextGen X Sales, IEO and Trading Network. In addition, the Company again notes that SSC will be changing the name of NextGen X to GenXPlus, moving forward.
Xunlei Ltd. recently announced that the Company’s cloud computing business model for sharing economy was cited by the 2018 White Paper on China’s Blockchain Industry as an endeavor to lower bandwidth cost through innovation, improve internet speed, save energy and reduce carbon dioxide emission. The 2018 White Paper on China’s Blockchain Industry (the “White Paper”) is an authoritative report issued by the Information Center of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People’s Republic of China (the “MIIT Information Center”). In formulating such White Paper, the MIIT Information Center conducted extensive research on macro policies, multiple industries and select companies with blockchain applications. Xunlei’s shared computing model is cited as one of the mainstream blockchain infrastructure by the White Paper, which also notes that Xunlei’s blockchain-based hardware, OneThing Cloud, has been serving as a bridge in transforming idle computing resources shared by individual users into high-quality resources that enterprises can utilize. According to the White Paper, Xunlei’s shared computing model helps enterprises reduce operating costs, enhance user experience, and more importantly, save energy and reduce carbon dioxide emission.
Read More: Hypergiant Partners With Station Houston To Launch Inaugural AI Fellowship
NXT-ID Inc. recently announced that the United States Patent and Trademark Office has issued US Patent Number 9,979,724, entitled “Distributed Method and System to Improve Collaboration Services Across Multiple Devices.” The patent introduces the concept of collaborative services across multiple devices that may be used to utilize a common data or algorithms to recognize and authenticate a user for purposes of performing a variety of actions across many devices. It enables devices without specific authentication hardware or software components the ability to leverage the capabilities of nearby devices or contribute by sending data to an authentication service. “This technology improves the security and operation of the IoT by enabling multiple devices to work together to improve accuracy and convenience,” David Tunnell, CTO of NXT-ID. “Now, instead of simply authenticating with a single device, multiple devices may work together to identify and authenticate users. This introduces numerous possibilities for collaborative services in the future as the IoT grows. Beyond authentication, these collaborative services can include jointly performing tasks or jointly providing services to the user.”


