Bgogo, A Newly Formed Crypto Trading Platform Is Set To Dominate The Crypto Trading Space

12 Jul 2018

With a Rewarding Ecosystem and Strategic Investment by Pantera Capital, Bgogo Might Become the Crypto Trading Behemoth
Since the advent of cryptocurrencies, fiat currency traders are migrating to crypto trading and the because of that, many crypto trading and exchange services are appearing, but not all of them have the capability and resources to handle a massive amount of real-time transactions. There are a few crypto trading services that are making a name in the world of cryptocurrencies and Bgogo is one of them.
The newly formed cryptocurrency trading company is bringing a lot of innovative features to the table that has never been talked or offered by any other crypto trading platform including Binance or Fcoin. The primary unique selling point of Bgogo is that they emphasis over the quality and excellence of the crypto exchange, meaning, their trading platformis not only reliable, but it makes transactions with a speed of light. This is the prominent reason for considering the Bgogo trading platform.
Bgogo
Follow Us
Furthermore, Bgogo is about to launch their own platform token named as BGG. With the launch of this game-changing token, traders who carry out exchanges on Bgogo’s platform will be rewarded even for smallest actions. Unlike other trading platforms that hardly reward their traders for anything, Bgogo will reward their traders with three things:
The first reward that is a complete game changer is the negative fee on every transaction. The traders will get BGG tokens for the equivalent of their transaction fee within 30 minutes.
The Second Reward is that the BGG Supernodes will be granted Sole Listing Authority (voting rights for new token listing) and Share 20% of the trading fees.
Lastly, every 24 hours Bgogo will use all of the trading fees accumulated from a trader to repurchase BGG tokens.
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
The Team of Bgogo Includes professionals with a working background in tech giants like Google, Facebook, Twitter, and IBM. Also,Bgogo is a fully secured and hassle-free platform as it is operating under the supervision of Ms. ZHANG YIBO who has over 12 years of professional experience in asset management, private equity, listed companies and investment management sectors both in Hong Kong and in Mainland China. Moreover, Bgogo is backed by a blockchain investment giant Pantera Capital as they have officially announced strategic investment in Bgogo. It is just a matter of time when Bgogo takes over the crypto trading industry.
ZHANG YIBO
“Currently, we are dedicated to reshaping the crypto exchange ecosystem. We will reward the community through the optimised structure and best blockchain projects. We are looking forward to better compliance, fairness, openness and complete transparency. In the future, Bgogo will not only be the leading crypto assets trading platform but also be the leader in a token economy. The token economy has the potential to reconstruct the productive relationship, but also redefine producer, consumer, owner, and user. Token economy and blockchain will revolutionise the way to deliver value. Bgogo is devoted to the innovation. Stay tuned to witness our revolutionary projects and innovative models.”– Ms ZHANG YIBO, CEO.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections


