CloudMinds’s Showcase Of Groundbreaking Cloud-connected Smart Products Attracts Strong Interest

28 Mar 2018

At the 2018 Mobile World Congress (MWC), still rocking in Barcelona, CloudMinds showcased its unique set of smart products featuring futuristic technologies, which conjured up enormous interest from the attendees and attracted strong publicity from both Chinese and international media. As one of the largest premier trade shows for the ICT industry globally, MWC is often considered a “trendsetter for mobile communication”. At such a world-class exposition, what is the secret to CloudMinds’s stardom despite strong competition from fellow exhibitors?
With an unrelenting focus on cutting-edge technologies such as cloud-connected smart machines, high-speed and secure networks, and secure and smart end-use devices and robotic controls, CloudMinds has been bringing innovative products to market, for example their Cloud Pepper greeter robot, security patrol robot, globally-controlled grasp robot,and seeing-eye robot.
Also at this year’s MWC is the Cloud AI Raman substance testing terminal, which enables ultra-fast matching and mixture ratio analysis based on powerful computation and analysis capabilities on the cloud. With the accuracy of the test results approaching 100%, the instrument can be used for applications such as the detection of narcotics and hazardous substances, food safety analysis, drug identification, jewelry appraisal, and materials tracking.
The palm-sized ultrasonic machine, dubbed the new “rising star” of medical inventions, is embedded with the highest-performance CPU and GPU chips and powered by the beam-forming ultrasonic algorithm. While enabling secure transmission and storage of health data, the Cloud-connected, AI-aided diagnostic and operating system could make remote ultrasound services available to more frontline health service providers so that doctors could easily and expeditiously access rich diagnostic information, making this an ideal flexible tool for large hospitals and rural clinics alike.
Cloud Pepper, a robot featured at previous MWCs, can be placed in business locations, company lobbies, and large shopping malls to greet and direct visitors, answer business queries, take customer requests, market products, and entertain VIPs. Cloud Pepper robots have been deployed to service many business venues, including Huazhu hotels and Bank of China and China Mobile offices, where they became an instant celebrity.
Building on its alignment strategy for China and overseas and its distributed footprint, CloudMinds will continue to expand internationally, deepen its “global engagement,” and foster more partnerships to bring about a prosperous cloud-intelligence robot industry and to shape a better and smarter future for mankind.


