Acuity Cloud Solutions And Cisive Announce Partnership

25 Apr 2018

Partnership will support enterprise clients by integrating Cisive solutions within Oracle HCM Cloud
Cisive, a global provider of compliance-driven human capital management and risk management solutions, and Acuity Cloud Solutions, an expert in HCM cloud-based application support and services, have recently partnered to streamline the hiring process by integrating background screening and I-9 solutions within shared clients’ Oracle HCM Cloud platforms.
Integrating Cisive’s employment screening and onboarding solutions with enterprise HCM solutions improves productivity, compliance, and the user experience of HR professionals and candidates alike.
Cisive, an Oracle Gold-level member of Oracle PartnerNetwork (OPN), is accredited by the National Association of Professional Background Screeners (NAPBS) and ranked #1 in the Size of Deal category of HRO Today’s Baker’s Dozen Customer Satisfaction Ratings of top employee screening providers. Large enterprise organizations with complex program requirements trust Cisive to deliver the highest levels of accuracy and compliance. Cisive’s dedicated account management teams uphold its commitment to customer service and onshore operations have a relentless focus on keeping clients safe.
Acuity is also an Oracle Gold-level member of Oracle PartnerNetwork (OPN) and delivers expert functional and technical implementation services for Oracle and other industry-leading HCM cloud solutions. Drawing from hundreds of successful client engagements in a wide variety of industries, Acuity’s experts deliver innovative solutions and best practices to ensure systems are aligned with business products and processes, implemented and supported efficiently and optimized to their highest potential. Heidi Hurt, CEO and Founder of Acuity, shares, “We’re pleased to be partnering with Cisive who shares our vision of delivering powerful HR solutions to our shared clients.”
James Owens
“Integrating Cisive’s employment screening and onboarding solutions with enterprise HCM solutions improves productivity, compliance, and the user experience of HR professionals and candidates alike,” said James Owens, CEO and President at Cisive. “We’re pleased to partner with Acuity and look forward to working with its team of experts to simplify clients’ integrations.”
Businesses engaged with Acuity and Cisive benefit from a full-service partnership offering the expertise needed to implement and maximize an integrated solution for background screening within Oracle and other enterprise HCM cloud solutions.


