Voxware Announces General Availability Of Augmented Reality Solution

18 May 2018

Voxware’s AR innovation now included as part of Cloud Voice Management Suite 2018
Voxware, a leading provider of cloud-based voice and analytic supply chain solutions, today announced the general availability of Voxware Voice Management Suite 2018. As part of this software release, Voxware is now offering vision, voice and scanning solutions through its Augmented Reality (AR) technology.
“By continually investing in and innovating our technology, we’re able to offer solutions for our customers that enable them to perform at the highest level of efficiency.” @Voxware_Inc CEO Keith Phillips #AR
Voxware first introduced Augmented Reality at ProMat 2017 and showcased two use case scenarios, ‘Packing & Shipping’ and ‘Returns & Receiving’. By working with its customers and listening to prospective customers’ needs, Voxware has seen significant interest for AR in other workflows, including the traditional picking workflow.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive
Keith Phillips
“The Voxware VMS 2018 software release represents a significant milestone for Voxware,” said Keith Phillips, President and CEO of Voxware. “By continually investing in and innovating our technology, we’re able to offer solutions for our customers that enable them to perform at the highest level of efficiency. Augmented Reality is another example of how we continue to differentiate our product offering from other solutions available in the marketplace. We have built voice, vision and scanning capabilities into a single unit so there is no need for adding on other devices or equipment. It enables workers to leverage the most appropriate technology to complete specific tasks in the most efficient manner possible.”
Companies rely on Voxware VMS to improve speed, accuracy and efficiency across all functions in the distribution center. Using Voxware VMS, customers realize immediate improvements in accuracy, double-digit productivity gains, reduced labor and operating expenses and complete visibility into the entire distribution operations.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World
Voxware VMS 2018 includes an array of functional enhancements including alert capabilities from the VoxPilot analytics to allow notification to supervisors of impending issues and opportunities. The alerts will allow warehouse supervisors and managers to make real-time adjustments to avoid problems before they arise to achieve maximum efficiency in the warehouse. Additionally, VMS 2018 includes a full technology update to provide increased protection against cyber intrusion and significant improvements in performance.
Voxware VMS 2018 is available today through Voxware’s unique SaaS offering, which makes it much easier for companies to adopt new, innovative solutions while also keeping them on the latest hardware and software.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group


