Cerebri AI Chosen As A 2018 Red Herring North America Top 100 Winner

09 Jul 2018

Prestigious Accolade Honors the Most Promising Privately-Held Tech Companies Past Winners Include Alibaba, Google, Spotify, Twitter, and YouTube
Cerebri AI, a fast-growing machine-learning startup whose groundbreaking Cerebri Values™ software lifts customer success for major enterprises, has been named by Red Herring to its 2018 Top 100 list recognizing the most promising privately-held technology companies in North America.
With over 2,000 applicants in 2018, the annual competition honors the continent’s most exciting and innovative private technology companies. Red Herring’s editors have been evaluating the world’s startups and tech companies for over two decades. Entrants were judged by industry experts, insiders and journalists on a wide variety of criteria including financial performance, innovation, business strategy and market adoption.
Follow Us
Arun Prakash
Past winners include standout companies such as Alibaba, Google, Kakao, Skype, Spotify, Twitter, and YouTube.
“Cerebri AI is thrilled to be recognized by Red Herring as one of the Top 100 startups in North America,” said Cerebri AI CFO and VP Operations Arun Prakash, who accepted the award on behalf of the entire team. “When you add this award to the news of our Series A financing led by M12, Microsoft’s venture fund, and the release of Cerebri Values, our machine-learning powered customer success software, one thing is clear: Cerebri AI is on a roll.”
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
“2018’s crop of Top 100 winners has been among our most intriguing yet,” said Red Herring chairman Alex Vieux. “North America has led the way in tech for so many years, and to see such unique, pioneering entrepreneurs and companies here in California, which is in many ways the heartland of the industry, has been a thrilling experience.”
“What has excited me most is to see so many people forging niches in high-tech and cutting-edge sectors,” added Vieux. “Some of the technical wizardry and first-rate business models on show here at the conference has been fantastic to learn about. We believe Cerebri AI embodies the drive, skill and passion on which tech thrives. Cerebri AI should be proud of its achievement: the competition was incredibly strong.”
Read More: The Three Biggest Industries Who Can Utilize A Language Translation Device


