SpotX Launches Online Resource Library For Publishers Seeking GDPR Guidance

22 May 2018

The Library Is Part Of A Wider Educational Initiative By SpotX To Offer Everything A Publisher, Media Owner, Or Advertiser Needs To Know About Preparing For GDPR Compliance
SpotX, the leading video advertising and monetization platform, today announced the launch of an online resource library offering a variety of content to foster awareness and education about the implementation of data protection as it pertains to the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). The library can be found on the company’s website and is part of a wider educational initiative by SpotX to offer everything a publisher, media owner, or advertiser needs to know about preparing for GDPR compliance.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive
Effective May 25, 2018, GDPR aims to strengthen and unify data protection for individuals in the European Union and applies to any company that processes personal data of subjects in EU member states, even if the data subject is not an EU citizen. The new regulations intend to give individuals control over their data and to simplify the regulatory environment for international business. Companies that do not comply with GDPR regulations face fines up to 4 percent of their annual global revenue, including its parent company or €20 million, whichever is greater.
Mike Shehan
“As a global company, we are well aware that GDPR is a huge concern for everybody within the digital ecosystem, and the implications of non-compliance are massive,” said Mike Shehan, co-founder and CEO at SpotX. “One of our company’s missions is to support our partners by providing all of the necessary tools, information, and guidance they may need to effectively and efficiently execute advertising transactions.”
As part of its own GDPR compliance strategy, SpotX has created an internal, cross-functional, global GDPR Task Force to help train all SpotX employees on the new regulations and provide extensive guidance for every type of stakeholder. SpotX is also developing several tools and products that will allow its partners to manage their own privacy settings.

SpotX’s educational initiative includes plans for future case studies, roundtable discussions, social media campaigns, and more blog posts describing important GDPR information and recommended action items. For more information about SpotX’s GDPR compliance strategy, please email GDPR@spotx.tv.
SpotX is currently in the process of merging operational businesses with its sister company smartclip. SpotX’s GDPR initiatives are all-inclusive of both organizations in their respective regions.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group


