Tekfen Invests In Industrial Cybersecurity Leader Claroty

11 Jun 2018

Brings Total Funding to $93 Million
Tekfen Ventures has made an investment in Claroty (https://www.claroty.com/) to support innovation and security in industrial control networks. The investment in Claroty, a leading cybersecurity provider, is part of Tekfen’s commitment to technological advances in critical heavy industries in Turkey and abroad. Tekfen Ventures invested in Claroty as part of a consortium of leading global industrial operators.
Read More: Kraken Joins NVIDIA Inception Program
Claroty is well-positioned to meet the security needs of increasingly connected, smart industrial assets that are vulnerable to cyberattacks. The company is supported by leading industrial controls system companies and a syndicate of new investors including Temasek, Siemens, Schneider Electric, and Rockwell Automation. Existing investors Bessemer Venture Partners, Team8, Innovation Endeavors, ICV, and Mitsui also participated.
“Claroty is the clear leader in cybersecurity for industrial control systems. After assessing many other companies in the marketplace, it was abundantly clear to us that Claroty’s experience translated into the best protection for customers,” said Sinan Uzan, Board Member, Tekfen Holding. “As not only builders, but also operators, of major industrial assets, we see the growing threat of connected operations and need to be proactive in pursuing solutions to protect these resources. This makes Claroty a great strategic fit for Tekfen.”
Read More: Adobe And NVIDIA Announce Partnership To Deliver New AI Services For Creativity And Digital Experiences
Founded in 2014, the company was incubated by Team8, a global cybersecurity platform funded by industry leaders including Microsoft, Cisco, Qualcomm and Intel. Claroty provides visibility into industrial networks, combining secure remote access with continuous monitoring for threats, that allows companies to operate securely. The company’s customers span six continents and nine verticals, and include numerous Fortune 500 companies.


