Kraken Wins International Offshore Wind Energy Competition

01 Feb 2018

Kraken Wins Award for SeaVision 3D Underwater Laser Imaging System
Kraken Robotics  is pleased to announce that its German subsidiary, Kraken Robotik GmbH was named a winner in the Carbon Trust’s Offshore Wind Accelerator (OWA) competition. The OWA is a collaborative R&D program funded by nine leading offshore wind developers and the Scottish Government to reduce the cost of offshore wind energy. Kraken Robotik was one of only four companies selected in the competition.
Kraken will receive hands-on mentoring and advice from the nine OWA industry partners, which collectively represent over 75 per cent of the European offshore wind market, as well as a potential opportunity to demonstrate its SeaVision® 3D Underwater Laser Imaging System on installed foundations at a fully operational wind farm in Europe. The aim of the competition is to help advanced technologies access the large emerging market and become part of the normal subsea inspection strategy for offshore wind developers.
Michael Stephenson
Michael Stephenson, Project Manager of the Foundations Working Area in the Offshore Wind Accelerator commented, “Kraken’s winning technology is an exciting advancement in subsea inspection. Their previous experience in the oil and gas sector shows how transferrable many of the products and skills are to the offshore wind sector, and how it can continue to contribute to the falling costs of offshore wind.”
“We are very honored to be a winner in this competition,” said Dr. Jakob Schwender, Managing Director of Kraken Robotik GmbH. “Offshore wind turbine inspection is a burgeoning market opportunity that dovetails nicely not only with Kraken’s SeaVision technology but also our future Robotics-as-a-Service strategy. Aligning advanced remote sensing capabilities — such as those provided by our SeaVision™ system — with underwater robotics and predictive analytics should enable the offshore wind industry to make repair and maintenance activities more evidence based. This should enhance safety, increase efficiency and reduce costs and downtime.”
Analysis carried out as part of the OWA’s Underwater Inspection Methods study has shown that there is a real need for innovation in the offshore wind subsea inspection sector. As of January 2017, there were over 3,500 wind turbines installed in Europe. Over 80 per cent of these turbines are built using monopile structures. The European offshore wind industry is predicted to have significant growth over the next 10 years, and the monopile design will continue in popularity.
Current estimates show that around 35 to 40 per cent of the monopile fleet, the majority which are pre-2012 structures, have potentially been affected by issues relating to corrosion caused by the harsh marine environment. Additionally, many of the structures built post-2012 require performance monitoring. New structural designs are also coming online, and these will present additional inspection challenges for the industry.
The report, Wind Turbine Operations & Maintenance (O&M) Market – Global Market Size, Trends, and Key Country Analysis to 2025, provides an overview of wind power technology, the value chain, and the introduction about wind turbine O&M market. The global wind O&M market grew from over US$2 billion in 2006 to nearly US$14 billion in 2016. The market is expected to reach over US$27 billion by 2025.
Offshore wind accounted for about 8% of the total wind O&M market in 2016, with a market size of over US$1 billion. Offshore wind attracts higher O&M costs in comparison to onshore wind. The harsh operating environment, higher turbine maintenance, higher logistics costs and a lack of skilled manpower make offshore wind services more challenging than the onshore equivalent. It is estimated that the offshore wind O&M market will continue to grow, to reach over US$5 billion by 2025.


