Honor Delivers The Future Of Mobile Technology With The AI-Powered Honor View10

18 Jan 2018

Honor is Among The First To Power A Smartphone With a Neural-Network Processing Unit (NPU) to Deliver AI Features And Performance That Far Surpasses Any CPU/GPU Powered Architecture
Honor, a leading smartphone e-brand, announced, on the eve of the Consumer Electronics Show (CES), that the AI-powered Honor View10 will go on sale in overseas markets from January 8th, 2018 and released a limited-edition Honor 7X Red. This follows the successful launch of the Honor 7X and Honor View10 in London last month.
In 2017, Honor was the number one smartphone e-brand in China by sales, and its sales grew significantly on Black Friday in the United States and Europe.
“As a leading e-brand, Honor aims to become the most loved smartphone brand for people young and the young at heart,” said Mr. George Zhao, President of Honor. “With a unique Internet-powered business model, unrivalled product and unbeatable value, we are taking our successful business model from China to the global market. Our aim is to become a top-five smartphone brand by 2020.”
As part of the strategy to bring a better experience to users, Honor works with partners such as Microsoft, Monster and Snapchat to optimize applications and services for its smartphones.
Honor View10: Revolutionary AI and ultimate performance appeal to consumers worldwide
As part of a drive to make AI technology accessible to consumers worldwide, Honor is among the first to power a smartphone with a Neural-Network Processing Unit (NPU) to deliver AI features and performance that far surpasses any CPU/GPU powered architecture. Integrating with the dedicated NPU, Kirin 970 chipset enables Honor View10 to deliver up to 25 times better performance and 50 times greater efficiency.
For the Honor View10, Honor worked closely with Microsoft to optimize Microsoft Translator. The AI Accelerated Translator software in Honor View10 delivers instantaneous translation without the need for an internet connection. The new Kirin 970’s powerful NPU makes the translation 500 percent faster than other smartphones running the same app.
Mr. Xuedong Huang
Mr. Xuedong Huang, Microsoft Technical Fellow in AI and Research said, “Microsoft is thrilled to be collaborating with Honor to bring the benefits of AI, through Microsoft Translator, to more users through the Honor View10. Together, we will continue to work towards building a more integrated and connected world.”
During China’s “Double 12” Shopping Festival after its launch in China for a week, the Honor View10 became the top selling smartphone product priced over RMB 3,000 (US$ 460).


