Autonomous Solutions, Inc. (ASI) Begins Work On First Major Autonomous Haulage Project

06 Jul 2018

ASI Mining Has Begun Work On A Project With Barrick Gold Corporation To Retrofit And Automate A Fleet Of Haul Trucks in Nevada
ASI Mining, has begun work on a project with Barrick Gold Corporation to retrofit and automate a fleet of haul trucks at the company’s Arturo Joint Venture operation in Nevada.
Drew Larsen
“This represents the first major autonomous deployment within the continental United States and signals a larger movement to adopt automation across the mining industry,” said Drew Larsen, Director of Business Development for ASI Mining.
During the initial phase of the project ASI will retrofit five Komatsu 930-E Ultra Class haul trucks to autonomous operation at the Arturo mine, located on property adjacent to Barrick’s Goldstrike operations. This phase will consist primarily of waste haulage, prior to moving into production. Subsequent phases will follow with potential expansion to additional trucks.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
“Not only is this agreement with Barrick significant in the ongoing growth of ASI Mining,” said Larsen. “It enables Barrick to embark on its autonomous surface mining strategy in a pragmatic and collaborative manner with a technology partner such as ASI.”
ASI’s Mobius Haulage A.I. will be a key component in the implementation and operation of the project. Mobius leverages advanced multi-vehicle command and control software to set up and manage a coordinated system of haul trucks. The Mobius Haulage Platform manages autonomous traffic, coordinates manned or unmanned vehicles and regulates the haul cycle in the most efficient way possible.
By employing the Mobius platform at the Arturo mine, Barrick anticipates enhancements across a range of critical performance measurements.
Matthew Majors
“The goal is to use advances in automation technology to help Barrick prove and deliver improvements in safety, efficiency and production,” said Matt Majors, Superintendent of Mining Operations and project manager for autonomous haulage.
“Barrick chose ASI as a partner for their ability to provide an agnostic product – agnostic to equipment manufacturer and to mine layout and practices. This offers us greater flexibility and cost savings. Using the ASI kits, we are able to retrofit our existing fleet of haul trucks as well as additional multi-manufacturer equipment which will help us to realize additional savings should we decide to scale the technology in the future,” said Majors.
Read More: UK And France To Strengthen Ties In Artificial Intelligence And Data
Autonomous Solutions, Inc. is a world leader in vehicle automation. ASI’s Mobius platform provides an OEM-agnostic, interoperable command and control software solution for autonomous vehicles. Mobius enables mine operations to integrate a variety of mining-based vehicles under a comprehensive platform. ASI’s robotic hardware and software systems allow users to safely manage their entire fleet of vehicles autonomously. We serve clients in the mining, agriculture, automotive, government, and manufacturing industries with remote control, teleoperation, and fully automated solutions, all from our headquarters and 100-acre proving ground in northern Utah.
ASI’s vehicle automation products can be found in companies and government agencies throughout the world, including Anglo American, Rio Tinto, Ford Motor Company, Case New Holland, General Dynamics, Sharp and others.
Barrick’s vision is the generation of wealth through responsible mining—wealth for our owners, our people, and the countries and communities with which we partner. Founded in 1983 and headquartered in Toronto, Canada, Barrick has 11,000 employees, with mining operations and projects in 10 countries.
Read More: Working Together To Strengthen The Lives Of Rural Americans
 


