LILY Adds Amazon Pay To Customer Check Out

11 Nov 2017

Premieres Video of Lily Next-Gen Drone
Mota Group’s LILY® division today gave people interested in buying a drone more reasons than ever to make the purchase. LILY added a sixth payment option, Amazon Pay, to its check out page and debuted a video giving prospective buyers a thrilling look at the capabilities of the new Lily Next-Gen™ drone.
Lily Next-Gen follow-me drone captures the fun in 4K Ultra HD / 1080p HD. It folds to the width of a smartphone. www.lily.camera
Amazon Pay makes it simple for hundreds of millions of customers around the globe to buy using the information already stored in their Amazon account. It joins LILY’s existing payment methods of credit and debit cards, PayPal, Bitcoin, and Affirm time payment options—the most of any consumer drone company.
“Customers trust Amazon Pay because it’s a familiar and convenient experience,” said Mota Group President Michael Faro. “Amazon Pay lets people focus on shopping rather than the mechanics of checking out.”
The video, available at http://go.lily.camera/4001, shows features of the Lily Next-Gen that help make drone flying fun and easy:
A class leading 4K / 1080p camera,
An 18-minute flight time that’s two minutes longer than its nearest competitor,*
Follow Me that captures the user’s adventures,
Smart Hover™, which helps the Next-Gen resist wind gusts and stay on course,
Geofencing to prevent flight into no-fly zones,
Orbit (360° ) to circle around a single point,
Object Tracking,
Autoflight software for one-touch take-off, return, and landing,
Automatic return home on critically low battery,
Dual GPS/GLONBASS satellite positioning, and
Optic flow and ultrasonic positioning for indoor flight and as a backup to GPS.
Lily Next-Gen is available in two configurations:
Lily Next-Gen Pro: Includes the Lily Next-Gen, 2 Batteries, 16GB Fast Memory, Lily Totable Carry Case, Lily Zipper Pouch, and Quick Charger.
Lily Next-Gen Full Bundle: Includes what’s in the Pro plus a Lily Precision Remote Controller, a set of Lily 360 Propeller Cages, and 3 batteries instead of two, all of which fit neatly inside the Lily Totable Carry Case.
MSRP is $699.00 for the Lily Next-Gen Pro and $899.00 for the Lily Next-Gen Full Bundle.
For previous customers of Lily Robotics, ownership of the Lily Next-Gen includes the opportunity to participate in the Lily Reward Program, a stock incentive program that will offer up to 1,000,000 shares of common stock, with no payment required other than the product order.
Previous customers of Lily Robotics can visit http://www.lily.camera/next, to indicate a no-obligation expression of interest to participate in the Lily Reward Program. The opportunity to acquire the stock will be made only after our offering statement is qualified by the SEC. Complete terms and conditions will be available at http://www.lily.camera/next. Mota Group may suspend, terminate or modify the Lily Reward Program at any time.
*Flight time depends on battery condition, flight conditions, and drone operation.


