Hughes Systique And Hughes Network Systems Launch Industry Leading WiFi Analytics Solution At NRF Big Show

18 Jan 2018

The Platform Includes Rich Visualization For Presence, Social and Web Analytics Along With The Ability To Customize The Graphs To Suit Different Enterprise Needs
Retailers today are seeking to understand customer behavior in their stores. While WiFi based analytics offers an excellent approach to provide these insights, current solutions are often challenging to deploy due to expense and lack of scalability. The HSC Analytics solution is cloud hosted, requires little to no configuration and is an ideal analytics platform for businesses to understand what their customers are doing and improve store efficiency. The platform includes rich visualization for Presence, Social and Web Analytics along with the ability to customize the graphs to suit different enterprise needs.
Ajay Gupta
“When we sat down with HNS to understand market pain points, we talked with many retailers. We asked them what were their biggest needs and key business objectives that a WiFi Analytics solution should provide. The answer was clear, retailers want to get deeper insights into shopping behavior so as to be able to translate those insights into actionable outcomes,” said Ajay Gupta, Sr. VP at HSC. “We knew we needed to not just collect the data, but also interpret it to a level where it helps answer business questions and then give an easy-to-use interface that allows store leaders to visualize the data and make real-time decisions.”
Sampath Ramaswami, Sr. Director, Enterprise Solutions at HNS said, “The combination of the cloud based analytics and visualization solution provided by HSC and the centralized, managed services from Hughes gives retail leaders the ability to run their business based on reliable and easily visualized data. Offered as part of HughesON Managed Solutions, which provides a tightly integrated solution encompassing SD-WAN, WiFi, Security, and VoIP Services, Hughes believes that this combination will lead retailers into the next phase of high quality, customer experiences and success.


