Reflektion Appoints Jody Stoehr As Vice President Of Client Engagement

16 May 2018

Reflektion Elevates Customer Team with Executive Appointment of Jody Stoehr
Reflektion, the world’s leading AI-powered personalization platform for the retail industry, today announced the appointment of Jody Stoehr as Vice President of Client Engagement. Reflektion utilizes artificial intelligence to calculate their preferences and intent. It then responds to every moment-to-moment interaction by displaying the most relevant content and products in real time and across the digital touchpoints that matter most—including preview and site search, product recommendations, category and landing pages, and email.
At the time of this announcement, Jody Stoehr, VP of Client Engagement, Reflektion, said, “I’m looking forward to drawing on my experience in digital marketing and software to develop a team that will aid in analytical insights, optimization strategies, and maximizing results for our clients. I’m thrilled to join the Reflektion team as we drive innovation in the AI and Machine Learning space.”
Jody Stoehr brings more than 25 years of sales and consultative marketing experience to Reflektion, where she will build a cross-functional team designed to assist clients in the adoption and use of the platform’s robust AI-powered personalization solutions.
“Given our recent growth, we want to ensure we stay ahead of client needs,” said Amar Chokhawala, Founder and CEO, Reflektion.
Amar added, “With extensive client management and digital marketing experience, Jody will be responsible for maximizing the results of our individualized personalization platform which will ultimately increase our clients’ top-line revenue. Jody is a great addition to our growing team.”
Currently, Reflektion’s AI-powered personalization platform listens to the behaviors of each individual shopper.Lead ing retail brands such as Destination XL, TOMS, Ann Taylor, Sur La Table, and Godiva rely on Reflektion’s platform.
Previously, Jody Stoehr served as the Managing Director of R2integrated’s (R2i) Seattle office where she was responsible for the development of full-service marketing solutions for Fortune 1000 companies including Amazon, Microsoft, and Bluetooth. In her preceding role at Marconi, Jody Stoehr was a SaaS wireless leader who helped the company land and grow the company’s largest account, Verizon Wireless.
In addition to her executive career, Stoehr has served as an advisor, board member, and committee chair for various tech startups and organizations including R2integrated and Sales and Marketing Executives International (SMEI). She and her teams have received numerous awards for extraordinary performance including the Adobe Marketing Cloud Partner of the Year Award, Top Seattle Digital Agency, Best Marketing Engagement Campaign, and Pulse Award in Integrated B2B, among others.


