Spiro Pledges 100 Percent CRM Adoption With A Money-Back Guarantee

16 May 2018

Spiro, an AI-powered CRM, pledges to gain 100 percent CRM adoption — and change clients’ sales opportunities — with a money-back guarantee.
Spiro, provider of an AI-powered CRM, announced that its highly rated application is now available with a 100 percent CRM adoption money-back guarantee.
The application, which uses artificial intelligence to learn about users’ sales processes to increase sales teams’ effectiveness and deliver more accurate business insights, pulls information from sales professionals’ email, calendar, and more to create a schedule of touchpoints and recommended follow-ups so they can focus on building relationships and closing sales.
Forrester Research indicates that 47 percent of all CRMs fail to be adopted, yet a 2014 Nucleus Research study found that every dollar spent on CRM implementation can return up to $8.71 in sales revenue. The founding team at Spiro worked with more than 300,000 salespeople to develop a CRM eliminating sales pain points: handling data entry, identifying triggers along the sales funnel, planning, and developing ongoing training and customizations.
Adam Honig
Because lagging ROI has made some hesitant to invest in a new CRM, Spiro has pledged a money-back guarantee if adoption isn’t achieved. Adam Honig, the co-founder and CEO of Spiro, said, “The history of CRM is littered with failed projects because salespeople simply don’t use the solutions created. Spiro uses artificial intelligence to remove all the frustration from CRM. We’ve built a CRM that’s so easy to use, you’ll hardly know you’re using it, which is why we can offer — and stand behind — our CRM Adoption Guarantee.”
Joe LaBella
Joe LaBella, the senior director of sales and sales operations at West Creek Financial, said not only is his team using Spiro’s AI-fueled CRM, but it’s also gaining insights from the platform to generate more revenue. “Spiro’s intuitive user interface helps teams adopt a CRM that is easy to use and allows reps to successfully get up to speed very quickly,” LaBella explained.
Honig said, “Salespeople hate CRM because it literally does nothing for them except take up their valuable selling time. Spiro works in the background to do all the time-consuming data entry and then adds value back to sales teams by ensuring they don’t miss any follow-ups.”


