Wonder Boy: The Dragon’s Trap Now Available On Nintendo Switch And PlayStation4 At Retail Stores

15 Feb 2018

Nicalis Releases Physical Versions of the Classic Retro Remake
Nicalis, Inc. is proud to announce today’s physical release of Wonder Boy: The Dragon’s Trap for Nintendo Switch and PlayStation4 at major retailers across North America. In partnership with DotEmu, Nicalis has produced retail editions of the game with a generous collection of bonus items in the initial print run: a 12-track 3″ mini CD music sampler, a full-color instruction booklet, a reversible cover and a cell phone strap of Wonder Boy’s alternate form, Lizard-Man.
  The star of Wonder Boy: The Dragon’s Trap is a brave adventurer who faces the quest of a lifetime after being stricken by a curse and transformed into a half-human/half-lizard by the evil Meka-Dragon. In search of a cure, the player will explore the interconnected world of Monster Land and encounter a variety of enemies and curse-wielding dragons. The six different forms of our shape-shifting hero—human, lizard, mouse, piranha, lion and hawk—each have different abilities and make up just a small percentage of the colorful cast of characters included in this non-stop action/adventure platformer.
Wonder Boy: The Dragon’s Trap is a beautifully drawn and animated remake of the unforgettable Sega Master System game Wonder Boy III. The Nintendo Switch and PlayStation 4 versions are presented in widescreen HD, with enhanced interface functions, a new playable character (Wonder Girl), adjustable difficulty levels, a gallery mode and more. Best of all, players can press a button at any time to toggle between the modern hand-drawn visuals and the original 8-bit graphics, or between the re-orchestrated music and the original chiptunes.
Based in Southern California and founded in 2007, Nicalis, Inc. is currently celebrating its 10th year as a leading developer and publisher of highly polished, retro-inspired video games.
Established in 2007 and headquartered in Paris, France, DotEmu SAS licences, converts, publishes and distributes beloved retro games for today’s market.
Lizardcube is a Parisian studio founded by game industry veteran Omar Cornut and traditional comic/animation artist Ben Fiquet.
Read More: Blockchain Game, World Of Ether, Announces Lucrative Affiliate Program


