Manufacturing Robots: Collaborative Robots, Or Cobots, Work Safely Side By Side With Humans

27 Apr 2018

Industrial Robotics Boom, Collaborative Manufacturing Robots And Cloud Robotics Good News For Small To Mid-Size Businesses — In A New Article From eMazzanti Technologies
A NYC area IT consultant and MSP reviews exciting aspects of the revolution in manufacturing robotics, including collaborative robots and cloud robotics in a new article from eMazzanti Technologies.
The informative article describes how collaborative robots, or cobots, work safely side by side with humans. Advances in cobots and cloud robotics, where robots depend on cloud-based software to deliver programming, are also said to be good for small to mid-size businesses because of flexibility, ease of programming and lower cost.
Jennifer Mazzanti
“Manufacturing robots are coming to smaller factories, providing competitive advantages to early adopters,” stated Jennifer Mazzanti, CEO, eMazzanti Technologies. “With secure cloud and network technologies as a foundation, the potential gains are unlimited.”
Below are a few excerpts from the article, “Manufacturing Robots Revolutionizing Industry”
“Recent market studies show signs of an unprecedented boom in industrial robotics. An estimated 1.3 million manufacturing robots will be delivered to factories globally in 2018. Between now and 2020, the number is forecasted to grow by an average of 14% annually.”
Collaborative Robots
“Collaborative robots, or cobots, do just what their name suggests. They collaborate, most importantly with humans, but also with other robots. Extremely capable and flexible, cobots are also affordable. As motion sensing and artificial intelligence technologies get cheaper, collaborative robots become both more accessible and more capable.”
Cloud Robotics
“With an increasing number of robots depending on cloud-based software to deliver programming, cloud robotics offers significant benefits to manufacturing. Like other cloud applications, Robotics as a Service (RaaS) promises scalability, ease of maintenance, and cost reduction. RaaS can refer to both a technical method and a business model.”
Good News for SMB Manufacturers
“Now, a small business can lease a cobot to perform specific tasks on a production line. Because the robot is easy to train and operate, the organization can deploy the robot quickly, without the need to hire specialized personnel. Collaborative robots ease concerns about worker safety, and leasing options make implementation affordable.”
Manufacturing Robots First Steps
For small businesses looking to implement manufacturing robots as the next phase in building a smart factory, an important initial step is to partner with digital experts. Beginning the move to cloud-based operations sets the stage for taking advantage of cloud robotics and other advances in robotics technology.
For nearly two decades, eMazzanti Technologies has been guiding small to mid-size businesses through the process of digital transformation. An award-winning managed services provider, eMazzanti offers customized cloud solutions and cutting edge cyber-security to set you on the road to greater efficiency and productivity.
Read More: Bridging The Gap Between Physical And Digital Security Using AI


