Brain Corp CEO Eugene Izhikevich To Speak At UCI Road To Reinvention Conference

20 Mar 2018

AI And Robotics Company Co-Founder Speaking On Transformative Technology Panel
Brain Corp, an AI company specializing in the development of self-driving technology for robots, announced today its chief executive officer and co-founder, world-renowned computational neuroscientist Dr. Eugene Izhikevich, will speak at the fourth annual Center for Digital Transformation (CDT) “Road to Reinvention: Leadership in the Digital Age” conference at the University of California Irvine (UCI) Paul Merage School of Business.
The ‘Making Smart Bets: Investing in Transformative Technology’ panel will take place on March 22 at 3:40 p.m. The panel will discuss how the risk spectrum for new technologies has dramatically changed, therefore companies can no longer afford to take a ‘wait and see’ approach to adopting new technologies. The panel will examine artificial intelligence, robotics, virtual reality, and augmented reality.
Dr. Eugene Izhikevich
“Investing early in new technologies is crucial for leaders to gain a first-mover advantage in any industry,” said Dr. Eugene Izhikevich, CEO and co-founder of Brain Corp. “Technology can create a huge advantage for companies in fiercely competitive markets. For example, adopting BrainOS technology transforms ordinary equipment manufacturers into robotics companies, enabling the manufacturers to quickly emerge as industry leaders, forego years of R&D time, implement a faster go-to-market strategy, and avoid the expenses of developing in-house AI solutions.”
The panel will be moderated by Martin Giles, CDT Senior Industry Fellow and San Francisco Bureau Chief at MIT Technology Review. Additional panel speakers include Robin Hensley, Senior Director of Enterprise Transformation at UPS, and Jarrett Dube, Senior Director and Head of Creative Brand Marketing for Samsung’s VR initiatives.
“2018 brings business new challenges,” said Vijay Gurbaxani, founding director of the CDT and Taco Bell Professor of Business and Computer Science at the Merage School. “Through a series of thoughtful conversations with experienced leaders, our program will focus on helping attendees understand how to navigate the road ahead.”
Brain Corporation (Brain Corp) is a San Diego-based AI company that partners with manufacturers of commercial equipment and consumer electronics to convert their manually-operated products into autonomous robots. Brain Corp’s technology represents the next generation of artificial brains for robots. Brain Corporation is funded by the SoftBank Vision Fund and Qualcomm Ventures.
The Center for Digital Transformation works to advance the competitiveness and productivity of businesses in the digital economy. Guided by a distinguished and talented external advisory board, the center provides executives with a better understanding of the dynamics of the digital revolution and what these forces mean for their industries and organizations.
The Paul Merage School of Business at UC Irvine offers four dynamic MBA programs – plus PhD, specialty masters and undergraduate business degrees – that prepare business leaders for our digitally driven world. Through our programs, students acquire the exceptional ability to grow their organizations through strategic innovation, analytical decision-making, digital information technology and collaborative execution. In addition, the Merage School boasts Seven Centers of Excellence and an Executive Education program providing numerous and varied opportunities for students and the business community at large to enhance their education experience and update their professional expertise.


