Alelo Announces Webinar Series On The Future Of Artificial Intelligence In Education And Professional Training

18 May 2018

The webinars are designed to help ed-tech innovators, investors and industry practitioners get past the hype and understand AI’s true potential
Alelo has launched a webinar series on the future of artificial intelligence in education and professional training.
The webinars will cover how AI-based learning systems are closing critical skill gaps in the global workforce; why educators should welcome instead of fight AI-based learning methods; and how AI is enabling data-driven learning ecosystems. The webinars are designed to help ed-tech innovators, investors and industry practitioners get past the hype and understand AI’s true potential.
Seminar speakers will include Alelo experts and other thought leaders from the global community of artificial intelligence in education who will share their expert views on the transformational effect that AI is already having on the multi-trillion-dollar global training and education market.
The timing of the webinars is important because artificial intelligence is already enabling dramatic, measurable improvements in education and professional training by providing learners with immersive personalized experiences, empowering teachers to be more effective, and giving administrators predictive analytics to achieve superior outcomes. AI also significantly increases access for learners and lowers costs, and helps overcome some of the most persistent skill gaps in the global workforce. When the education and training industry takes full advantage of this new technology, the impact will be profound — as much as the adoption of compulsory education was in the 19th century.
Dr. Lewis Johnson
Dr. Lewis Johnson, CEO of Alelo, explains the webinars’ goals, “It’s important to provide a clear understanding of the true transformative potential of this new technology. Although there are many exaggerated claims surrounding AI in education and training these days, most applications are just scratching the surface of what is possible. Meanwhile, we hear concerns that AI may replace educators and eliminate their jobs. We want educators to understand how artificial intelligence supports students outside of the classroom, reduces drudgery and overwork, and makes the profession of education more rewarding.”
The first webinar in the series will look at how artificial intelligence is being used to overcome critical skill gaps in the global workforce by helping learners acquire new skills faster and apply them effectively in real-world situations. Future webinars will look at how educators can make best use of AI, how AI is spurring the development of data-driven learning, digital learning ecosystems, and how it will fundamentally transform the global educational industry. The series will offer insights to investors interested in funding the development of innovations in education.


