Veristor To Host Industry Experts During Cybersecurity For The Real World Tech Summit

02 Mar 2018

One-Day Technical Conference to Cover Real World Cyber Threat and Defense Strategies
Veristor Systems, Inc., a leading provider of transformative business technology solutions, today announced its latest Cybersecurity Tech Summit: Cybersecurity for the Real World. The one-day technical conference, to be held on Thursday, March 15, will feature enterprise leaders and security experts sharing firsthand experiences and best practices for fortifying security defenses in an increasingly risky world. Event attendees will qualify to earn up to 4 CPE credits.
Jackie Groark
“The network perimeter continues to disappear as IoT, cloud computing, mobile devices and the BYOD movement permeates the enterprise,” said Jackie Groark, Director, Security/CISO, Veristor. “Our latest Cybersecurity Tech Summit will outline the ways in which our existing approaches to managing threats and vulnerabilities are challenged and the best practices organizations should take to fortify their defenses to ensure that their organization’s data is protected – wherever it is.”
Cybersecurity Tech Summit attendees will hear from people that have not only encountered threats, but successfully fought back. Each speaker will share firsthand experiences on what it takes to mitigate and prevent threats, as well as protect against the cyberattacks that target data, applications and ultimately, corporate brands.
Expert speakers include:
Darren Highfill, Chief Information Security Officer, Norfolk Southern
Charles D. Bloodworth, Sr. Special Agent, Atlanta Electronic Crime Task Force, US Secret Service
Richard Busby, Vice President Corporate Information, Security Forensics, E*TRADE
Michael Payne, Cyber Security Solution Architect Lead, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Tennessee
Michael Walter, Managing Director, Protiviti
Jorge Alago, Cyber Security Architecture Lead, Veristor
The event, to be hosted at the Veristor Corporate office at 4850 River Green Parkway in Duluth, Georgia, will be held from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on Thursday, March 15. The event is sponsored by Bitglass, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, Varonis, Trend Micro, Thycotic, Apptega, RedLock, Arrow, Palo Alto Networks, Gemalto, Commvault, Mimecast and Tanium. Attendees of the one-day conference will earn up to 4 CPE credits.
 


