MrOwl, A New Platform For Discovering, Collaborating And Sharing Interests, Announces Its Launch To The Public

22 Aug 2017

The platform redefines how users traditionally curate and collaborate on the internet with unique features and capabilities
MrOwl, a free, new online technology that is a home for all of one’s interests is launching to the public after completing its beta testing period.  Available as an app and online, the platform brings together the power of internet social and search technology in one service. From topics like travel to entertainment to food, users can easily organize their content all in one easy place with subtopics, links, photos, documents, and more.  Users create the collections and keep them private or share them.  They can also collaborate with other users with just a few clicks of the mouse. It couldn’t be any simpler!
MrOwl distinctively redefines search by allowing users to control relevancy and information.  By letting them search subsets of information on MrOwl, it’s even easier to find what they are actually looking for.  This next level of discovery and search is all part of Web 2.0 – combining curation from real people, along with artificial intelligence.  MrOwl doesn’t rely on just algorithms and formulas, but rather, focuses on and celebrates an evolved approach to discovery and search. MrOwl does this by using a proprietary ranking system to know which people are most influential on topics, which allows their information to rank appropriately.  Topics are continually built and pruned by actual users, which enhances the overall experience and makes the discovery engaging and endless.
Understanding the MrOwl Platform
“Branches” –  Users can easily build, organize, and share topic “branches,” which are collections of information including links, documents, spreadsheet and pictures.  These “branches” can be built by one person or they can be a collaboration, built by many people. Branches can be shared through email or social media. In this manner people can collaborate on topics they are passionate about and that inspire them every day!
Searchable – Each “branch” is searchable.  In effect, each branch becomes a mini-customized search engine of the content, where even the documents you’ve added are searchable. Nowhere else online can you put in documents, spreadsheets and links and search them all together in this way.
Grab – Users can quickly “grab” branches they like to save them for later.
Heart – Users can “heart” branches to show they like them.
Community Tree –  A collection of topics curated by the community altogether.  As users add and remove information from the MrOwl Community Tree, its serves as recommendations to the master MrOwl Community Tree.  In this manner, the MrOwl Community Tree is built and pruned by the community of MrOwl users.
How MrOwl Brings Topics to Life
Personal – For all passion points and topics that inspire you, MrOwl allows for smart discovery. Plan trips, parties and other activities as a group. For example, fans looking to organize their fantasy football research this year or fans of Harry Potter who are looking to lose themselves in a fantasy world, can share with friends while immersing themselves in their favorite interests.  Collaboration and sharing your world has never been easier.
Education – The platform is ideal for all ages from pre-school to college. Teachers can use MrOwl to create a class website, uploading documents and adding links to resources.  Teachers can also create lesson plans while students can upload their homework documents, collaborate for class projects and organize their studies.
Business – Teams can upload documents, photos and other pieces of information within private branches on MrOwl, which are saved within the cloud.  They can message within the platform and create collaborative branches to help keep track of all project logistics.  It’s a great way for businesses to keep everything in one place. It’s better than other file sharing applications because you can add links along with your documents and photos, and you can now search in a better way.
“Currently the way we interact online is a one-size fits all “off-the-rack” experience that lacks organization and the ability to keep everything in one convenient place,” said Arvind Raichur, MrOwl CEO. “With MrOwl, we set out to give people the ability to take control of their Internet and share their world, while getting the experience that they actually want.”
MrOwl is made up of a connected community curated by real people with collaboration tools that make it simple and fun for consumers to collaborate and share topics they love.  MrOwl gets wiser as more people use it.  With an emphasis on human curation, the platform is able to judge which links and branches are the most influential to the overall audience based on what people have curated and how they’ve curated the information.


