Wylei Appoints J&J Veteran Denice Torres To Board Of Directors

02 Feb 2018

Denice Torres is A Senior Executive With Extensive Healthcare And Consumer Experience Developed Across A 25-Year Career At Johnson & Johnson And Eli Lilly
Wylei Inc., an AI Predictive Content technology and marketing automation pioneer, today announced the appointment of Denice Torres to its Board of Directors. Torres is a recent past President for J&J, and an industry thought leader, with a strong background in digital marketing and executive management.
Meg Columbia-Walsh
“The addition of Denice to the Wylei board is a major milestone for the company. Denice is a well-known and award winning industry veteran and experienced executive,” said Wylei CEO Meg Columbia-Walsh. “Her industry knowledge, mentoring and reach will be invaluable to Wylei.”
The Wylei board provides leadership for carrying out Wylei’s mission to promote growth and revenue by leveraging advanced AI and machine learning technology to drive true 1:1 marketing personalization at scale.
Torres joins the ranks of acclaimed board members including Meg Columbia-Walsh, John Martinson, Kevin Mably and Sheryl Goldstein.
Denice Torres
Denice Torres is a senior executive with extensive healthcare and consumer experience developed across a 25-year career at Johnson & Johnson and Eli Lilly. At J&J, Torres served as Chief Strategy and Business Transformation Officer for the medical device sector, Co-Chair of the North America Consumer Business, President of McNeil Consumer Healthcare, and President of Janssen Pharmaceuticals, CNS. Prior to J&J, Torres held senior commercialization roles with Lilly.
Torres has extensive experience in corporate and portfolio strategy and has managed all major business functions. She has a strong background in marketing and is passionate about exceeding customer expectations. In 2015, Torres was selected Woman of the Year by Healthcare Business Women’s Association.
Denice Torres has a BS in Psychology from Ball State, JD from Indiana University, and MBA from the University of Michigan. The Wylei Board of Directors is comprised of prominent business, marketing and academic professionals throughout the country.
Wylei, a pioneer in Predictive AI cloud-based machine learning and marketing automation, enables the creation and delivery of real-time, personalized content to engage more buyers per marketing campaign. Wylei’s AI (artificial intelligence) technology drives true personalization at scale, efficiently eliminating the need for A/B testing. Working with high profile consumer and technology brands, the patented Wylei Predictive Content™ technology automatically delivers real-time digital content that is assembled and displayed based on context, user behavior and preferences.


