Acuity Brands Applauded By Frost & Sullivan For Enhancing IoT Applications For Connected Buildings

11 Jul 2018

Acuity’s Atrius IoT platform transforms data from its digital sensory network into software services that can be continually used for application development.
Based on its recent analysis of the global Internet of Things (IoT) solutions market for lighting systems, Frost & Sullivan recognizes Acuity Brands with the 2018 Global Product Leadership Award. As part of the company’s continued innovation, Acuity Brands combines lighting with software, sensors, and connectivity to establish smart networked lighting systems, transforming lighting from a simple utility into a full-fledged technology.
Acuity Brands (PRNewsfoto/Frost & Sullivan)
Follow Us
Adrian Drozd
“Acuity has expanded its comprehensive set of IoT business solutions, which includes intelligent luminaires, controls, software platform services, and development tools. It recently unveiled Atrius™ IoT Solutions, which combine its software as a service (SaaS) and cloud platform into a single identity,” said Adrian Drozd, Research Director. “By digitalising smart LED lighting, sensors, beacons, and controls into the Atrius™-Ready sensory network, Acuity Brands provides ubiquitous connectivity as well as a software platform that transforms raw data into meaningful information and business applications.”
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
Atrius-Ready smart lighting infrastructure amplifies business performance and human experience with indoor positioning, wayfinding, asset tracking, spatial analytics, and space utilization services. This powerful performance is made possible through solutions such as:
Atrius Navigator, a software development kit for mobile applications
Atrius Insights, which connects a visitor’s path with detailed spatial data. It generates business analytics for enriching customer interactions, physical layouts
Atrius Spaces, which employs occupancy data captured through the lighting control network to understand the ways in which people use spaces inside buildings
Atrius Assets, which combines real-time asset tracking services with Bluetooth Low Energy technology tags
Read More: The Three Biggest Industries Who Can Utilize A Language Translation Device
Using the data unlocked from the Atrius-Ready Sensory Network, business managers can optimize operations and customer experiences, notably in retail, aviation, and healthcare applications. Today, Atrius is moving well beyond the proof of concept stage, deploying full-scale IoT applications in more than 160 million square feet of indoor spaces.
“Acuity and its ecosystem of Atrius™ IoT Partners implement optimized solutions tailored to the specific needs of different industries, presenting customers with unparalleled levels of flexibility,” noted Drozd. “The company’s commitment to delivering high-quality products and services will help it sustain its momentum as well as drive its expansion strategies in markets all over the world.”
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
Each year, Frost & Sullivan presents this award to the company that has developed a product with innovative features and functionality that is gaining rapid market acceptance. The award recognizes the quality of the solution and the customer value enhancements it enables.
Frost & Sullivan Best Practices awards recognize companies in a variety of regional and global markets for demonstrating outstanding achievement and superior performance in areas such as leadership, technological innovation, customer service, and strategic product development. Industry analysts compare market participants and measure performance through in-depth interviews, analysis, and extensive secondary research to identify best practices in the industry.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc


