Astro Aerospace Partners With Paterson Composites To Build Its Autonomous Passenger Drone

19 Jun 2018

Astro Aerospace teams up with carbon composite manufacturer, Paterson Composites, to build its Passenger Drone and welcomes CEO Rob Paterson as advisor to the Design Team
Astro Aerospace (OTCQB:ASDN), the company creating autonomous aerial vehicles and drones, is announcing its partnership with Paterson Composites, the carbon composite manufacturer that has worked with notable companies such as Aurora Flight Sciences (a Boeing company), Multimatic Technical Centre, Carbon Marine and Synaptive Medical. In addition to the partnership, Rob Paterson, President and CEO of Paterson Composites will build components on the Astro Aerospace Passenger Drone, a state-of-the-art aerial transport vehicle that enables passengers to fly manually or autonomously.
“We are elated by our new partnership with Paterson Composites, specialists in the work of carbon fiber, who will undoubtedly enable us, as a team, to build an aerial vehicle capable of awing and serving the world”
Paterson Composites has experience building composite components for aerial vehicles across the aerospace, defense, medical, and marine industries with particular experience in aerial vehicles. Specializing in carbon fiber, Paterson Composites will work with Astro Aerospace to construct the entire airframe of the Passenger Drone including the cockpit, frame, and propeller blades.
Read More: Interview With Dorian Selz, Co-Founder & CEO, Squirro
Rob Paterson
Rob Paterson, President and CEO of Paterson Composites, will be joining Astro Aerospace as an advisor to the Design Team, bringing with him a select group of industrial engineers that will join the development team. Rob is a leading industry expert that has experience in crafting teams of specialists, designers, and engineers. As a seasoned businessman, he has led some of the world’s most complex design structures and construction formats, working closely with both robotics and composites for over 10 years.
“I’m pleased to be joining the Astro Design Team as its newest advisor, and look forward to offering my expertise to a project that will propel the aerial industry forward and take vehicular production a step into the future,” says Rob Paterson, CEO of Paterson Composites. “I plan on helping the Passenger Drone project excel using many years of project management experience, a passion for engineering and design, and a personal commitment to creating innovative products for the world.”
Read More: How “System Mindfulness” is changing the FMCG Industry
The Astro Aerospace Passenger Drone is eco-friendly and emission-free, and its touch flight control enables passengers to fly manually or autonomously. The fully-functional prototype includes VTOL capabilities and hosts 16 individual rotors to maximize safety and performance. The Drone is designed to reduce aircraft weight and magnetic interference using fiber-optic technology, and the exterior is built with carbon fiber materials. Paterson Composites together with Astro Aerospace will build the second version of the Passenger Drone which will available for purchase by the public upon production completion.
“We are elated by our new partnership with Paterson Composites, specialists in the work of carbon fiber, who will undoubtedly enable us, as a team, to build an aerial vehicle capable of awing and serving the world,” says CEO of Astro Aerospace, Bruce Bent. “We are also looking forward to the addition of Rob Paterson to the Astro Aerospace Design Team as its newest advisor. His guidance and project management skills, which will be placed towards the construction of the Passenger Drone, are highly respected, credible, viable, and of course, appreciated as we embark on this journey.”
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?


