Datametrex AI Provides Update On Negotiations With Lotte

24 Mar 2018

Datametrex Is A Big Data Company For Retail, Brands, And Other Organizations
Datametrex AI Limited (the “Company” or “Datametrex”) is pleased to announce that the Company is in final stages of negotiations for implementing the Nexalogy based artificial intelligence (“AI”) solution, “Nexa Intelligence”, with Lotte Group (“Lotte”) along with the Company’s partner Comas Co., a sister company of Daewoo Information Systems Co., both of which are owned by the Metanet Company. The initial phase of the project will be with one of the divisions of Lotte, with an option to expand across the organization.
“We are thrilled to share this update. The team at Nexalogy have done a great job positioning their tools to understand and analyze unstructured data in the Korean language, such that we can now offer Lotte and others the benefits of social analysis and discovery. We are pleased with the progress with Lotte and expect strong demand for our AI solutions across many departments,” says Andrew Ryu, CEO & Chairman of the Company.
Lotte Group is an international conglomerate consisting of over 90 business units employing 60,000 people engaged in such diverse industries as candy manufacturing, beverages, hotels, fast food, retail, financial services, heavy chemicals, electronics, IT, construction, publishing, and entertainment.
Datametrex AI Limited is a technology focused company with exposure to four exciting verticals. Big data, collecting data from retail point of sales environments. Artificial intelligence and machine learning through its wholly owned subsidiary, Nexalogy. Implementing Blockchain technology for secure data transfers through its joint venture company, Graph Blockchain Limited. Industrial scale cryptocurrency mining through its wholly owned subsidiary, Ronin Blockchain Corp.
Datametrex is a big data company for retail, brands, and other organizations.The company’s DataTap technology captures all data sent from the POS to the receipt printer and scanner, and then sends it to the cloud, so it can be presented for key decision making. The company is planning on integrating the DataTap environment to decentralized blockchains to further authenticate and validate the data collected.


