StarVR Powers Emaar Entertainment’s VR Park In Dubai

08 Mar 2018

End-to-end VR location-based entertainment solutions enable ultra-high resolution experiences and ultimate immersion at the VR Park at The Dubai Mall
StarVR Corporation announces a major deployment of its location-based VR entertainment solution at Emaar Entertainment’s VR Park at The Dubai Mall, one of the world’s largest indoor VR theme parks. Working in tandem with Starbreeze Studios, the park’s leading content partner, StarVR is providing end-to-end VR location-based solutions with highly-customized hardware, onsite installation, operator training and after service for the majority of Starbreeze’s attractions.
“We’re proud that StarVR location-based entertainment solutions are powering the majority of the experiences at the newly-opened VR Park in Dubai,” said Bo Andersson Klint, Chairman of StarVR Corporation. “With an industry-leading resolution and 210-degree field-of-view designed specifically for professional use, visitors can be immersed in premium VR experiences that are way beyond what’s available at home.”
“VR Park is the latest revolutionary experience to be delivered by Emaar Entertainment, offering cutting edge experiences alongside partners including StarVR,” said Damien Latham, Chief Executive Officer of Emaar Entertainment. “As we continue to deliver unprecedented entertainment experiences, we’re pushing the boundaries of innovation for the industry and inviting visitors to #ChallengeReality with our entertainment destinations.”
The Dubai Mall, the world’s largest shopping and entertainment destination, is part of Downtown Dubai, Emaar Properties’ flagship mega-development and at 12 million square feet, the mall’s total area is equivalent in size to 200 soccer pitches. Now home to Emaar Entertainment’s 75,000 square feet VR Park, the entertainment destination spans two levels of The Dubai Mall and is the largest high-quality indoor VR theme park.
At launch, visitors will be able to enjoy a variety of popular Starbreeze VR content in 5K ultra-high resolution and 210-degree field-of-view that only StarVR head-mounted displays (HMD) can deliver. They can step into the world of the Walking Dead where the apocalypse has hit in OVERKILL’s The Walking Dead – Outbreak, battle bots atop a towering building in APE-X as a massive weaponized cybernetic ape, play the legendary assassin John Wick in John Wick Chronicles, or experience an exciting and pivotal scene from Universal Studios’ 2017 film, The Mummy, as a Prodigium Agent tasked with capturing the ancient princess Ahmanet in The Mummy Prodigium Strike.
The StarVR solution boasts a premium VR HMD built from the ground-up for enterprise and professional entertainment use with its 5K resolution and 210-degree field-of-view, offering experiences above and beyond home environment setups. The solution features a high speed optical tracking system that can accurately track motion at scale to provide an ultra-immersive VR experience for LBE (Location-Based Entertainment) operators. StarVR Corporation offers end-to-end solutions featuring the StarVR HMD, customized hardware options, onsite installation services, operator training and after service.
 


