Gryphon Connect™ Offers Complete On-Premises Solution For Secure Voice And Data

15 May 2018

Gryphon Connect[TM] by Gryphon Secure allows users in unsafe networks to join a safe, closed network environment confidentially
Gryphon Connect[TM], an all-in-one solution that delivers end-to-end encryption for members of a closed network environment, launches today at Critical Communications World in Berlin. Users can easily access a secure environment from the office or on the move using Wi-Fi or Ethernet. Gryphon Connect[TM] secures VoIP phones, laptops, smartphones, IoT-devices and more.
Troy Stark
“With today’s ever-evolving communication threats, customers are looking for a portable, simple-to-use solution that they can integrate into their current infrastructure,” says Troy Stark, VP of Business Development, Gryphon Secure. “Gryphon Connect allows individuals in an untrusted network to build a secure network without exposing their end devices, whether the individual is in a traditional or home office environment, or even when travelling.”
Tapio Hill
Gryphon Connect™ is part of the Gryphon Secure Assure Communications Suite. “It’s all about privacy,” says Tommi Leino, VP of R&D, Gryphon Secure. “All data, sent and received, are end-to-end encrypted. When a VoIP desk phone is connected to Gryphon Connect, it’s part of the closed Assure communications network and users can make secure calls to others in the closed Assure network. This allows for immediate protection of your communications and information data.”
Gryphon Connect™ is designed for easy connectivity and flexibility – without compromising the security at its core. It also creates a platform for custom use cases where secure communication is required. Gryphon Assure network architecture delivers end-to-end encryption for all data transmission over a private network and infrastructure located on customer premises.
This week at Critical Communications World in Berlin, Germany, Gryphon Secure will demonstrate Gryphon Connect™ and the full Gryphon Assure Communications Suite of products. Visit the Gryphon booth in the Finland Pavilion located at B60 & B61.


