Microsoft And Flyreel Accelerate Insurance Industry Access To AI-Powered Underwriting Solution

20 Feb 2018

Flyreel’s Underwriting Automation Solution Combines Artificial Intelligence & Computer Vision to Help Carriers Save Time, Reduce Costs & Improve Customer Satisfaction
Microsoft and Flyreel, the most advanced AI-assisted underwriting solution for commercial and residential properties, today announced a working relationship to accelerate access to Flyreel’s exclusive underwriting assistant.
As part of the alliance, Microsoft is investing resources and expertise to accelerate Flyreel’s go-to-market strategy, bringing new efficiency and accuracy to the property and casualty insurance market.
Colin McClive
“So many of our insurance industry clients have been asking for this kind of intelligent, automated solution to help them cut costs, improve operational efficiency, and increase customer satisfaction and retention. But, we’ve been unable to find one–until now,” said Colin McClive, Director, US Insurance Industry at Microsoft. “That’s why we’re so excited to work with Flyreel. Their solution does just that by enabling end users to conduct on-demand property inspections for better transparency and accuracy across the entire carrier-policyholder relationship.”
Flyreel Ends the Guesswork in Pricing, Coverage & Claims
Insurance carriers face a number of challenges when it comes to efficiently and accurately pricing premiums and underwriting coverage. For high-value properties, a professional inspector may conduct an assessment, but this is expensive, inconsistent and can be difficult to scale. Many properties are insured sight-unseen based on averages for property features, contents and liability. That means carriers risk overvaluing the property, quoting a high premium and losing the business, or they may undervalue and charge too little, resulting in premium leakage. This can lead to insufficient coverage and customer dissatisfaction, especially in the wake of a claim.
Cole Winans
“Nearly 40 percent of customers look to switch carriers after a claim because of dissatisfaction with the way it was handled–most often because of discrepancies between the amount they thought they were covered for, versus what the insurance company is willing to pay,” said Cole Winans, CEO of Flyreel. “Flyreel solves that problem by letting the customer or another authorized end user act as the inspector to conduct an accurate assessment of the property value and its contents, ensuring a more accurate quote and sufficient coverage from the carrier. It’s a win for the entire insurance industry.”
User-Friendly AI Improves Carrier Efficiency, Expands Front Line Service
Built for scale on the Microsoft Azure platform and delivered through a mobile app, Flyreel’s conversational AI-powered assistant can be used by customers, inspectors or brokers, guiding them through inspections just like an expert underwriter would, adapting to the user’s input to ask appropriate questions. Flyreel’s proprietary, insurance-specific computer vision technology documents the property’s contents, condition and more to create a complete inventory with exceptional ease and speed. Insurers get detailed property and contents reports, allowing them to make underwriting decisions quickly and transparently, based on accurate data.
This enables carriers to offer better coverage and pricing to customers and work with policyholders to jointly mitigate risk. In the event of a claim, this baseline documentation helps minimize claim cycle times and expenses to ensure expediency and customer satisfaction at every point in the insurance lifecycle.
“Flyreel’s unique application of AI and computer vision technology provides a practical, user-friendly solution that empowers both consumers and carriers to make better, data-based decisions,” said Tereza Nemessanyi, Entrepreneur-In-Residence at Microsoft for Startups who leads incubation of early-stage startups in strategic industries. “This is a perfect example of how artificial intelligence changes the game: by making complex processes so simple, that we don’t know how we managed to do it before.”
Read More: Interview With Peter Cahill, CEO, Voysis


