IntSights To Launch “All-in-One” Threat Intelligence Platform At Black Hat USA 2017

26 Jul 2017

Combines Tailored and Generic Threat Intelligence with Automated Remediation to Protect Companies Against Dangers on the Dark, Deep and Open Webs
IntSights, a leading intelligence-driven security provider, announced that it will launch the industry’s most advanced threat intelligence platform (TIP) at Black Hat USA 2017, taking place July 26-27 at the Mandalay Bay in Las Vegas. The company will be in Booth IC35, demonstrating the only all-in-one solution that uncovers, prevents and mitigates both targeted and generic threats on the dark, deep and open webs.
Until now, there has been no comprehensive threat intelligence platform on the market. Legacy security solutions focus on generic threat vectors or subsets of the Internet, never painting a complete picture of the threats faced. As such, companies have had to incorporate products from multiple vendors, which lack the ability to work together.
IntSights scours the Internet for every kind of cyber threat, and delivers threat intelligence in near-real time. It automatically aggregates both tailored and generic intelligence from the open, deep and dark webs, and pushes it — in real-time and with context — to organizations’ security analysts and devices for remediation. It is the only TIP that identifies threats targeted toward specific companies, instantly alerting customers to phishing attacks and spoof domains, identity theft/stolen credentials, pending DDoS attacks, and all other online dangers to their business and customers.
“We identify tailored threats to our customers – threat actors, malware and campaigns trying to cause harm to your organization – and help you to deflect them early in the cyber attack chain, thus weakening hacker arsenals and thwarting planned attacks,” said Guy Nizan, CEO and co-founder of IntSights. “We also provide fully automated remediation and orchestration, enabling security analysts to protect their companies against external threats without additional personnel.”
IntSights uses proprietary AI and machine learning algorithms to collect, consolidate and analyze massive amounts of structured and unstructured data in real-time, then identifies the most critical and relevant threats, and provides fully automated mitigation capabilities. It scans billions of web pages each day, including social media, app stores, hacking forums, black markets, IRC channels, pastebin sites, phishing web sites and more. It then automates external remediation to take down fake websites and phishing domains, and internal remediation to dynamically update firewalls, endpoint solutions, email gateways and more with the threat data.


