Nodechain Inc Adds Fourty Cryptocurrency Mining Rigs To Its Growing Portfolio

16 Mar 2018

The Company Now Has A Total Of 45 GPU Computer Mining Rigs Capable Of Cryptocurrency Mining Multiple Cryptocurrencies
Nodechain, Inc (“Company” or “Nodechain, Inc”), a fully-reporting, diversified cryptocurrency company, is pleased to announce that the Company has added to its growing cryptocurrency portfolio via the purchase of 40 cryptocurrency GPU Mining Rigs for $5,500.00 each. The additions are (30) 1070 and 1070Ti NVDA GPU mining rigs and (10) AMD GPU mining rigs. The Company now has a total of 45 GPU computer mining rigs capable of cryptocurrency mining multiple cryptocurrencies.
The company intends to use all 40 new cryptocurrency mining rigs to mine Ethereum (ETH). Each machine can mine up to 15 Algorithms; Ethash, Equihash  Lyra2Rev, etc. The GPU mining rigs are capable of mining multiple cryptocurrencies and can mine masternode Proof of Stake (POS) cryptocurrencies as well.
“We continue to broaden our interests in the most lucrative arenas of cryptocurrency,” stated Andy Ibrahim, CEO of Nodechain, Inc. “Increasing our efforts in mining, and mining specifically for Ethereum, is a part of a concerted effort to take advantage of this tremendous new market opportunity.”
“We are now immediately capable of mining 10 Gigahashes which can generate rough monthly income of $15,000 per month in revenue if converted into USD at today’s market value. This is an outstanding source of revenue for Nodechain,” added Ibrahim. “These powerful mining rigs actually have a per unit value of $8,000 each due to the GPU’s being sold out nationwide. The prices of GPU cards are currently 30-40% higher than last year because of the boom in the blockchain industry making this below market purchase an immediate win for Nodechain with a significant monthly revenue output.”
Nodechain, Inc. is a publicly traded company on the Over-the-Counter (OTC) US market, trading under the ticker symbol NODC. Based out of Huntington Beach, California, we are engaged in the digital cryptocurrency mining and transaction validation operations.


