IFTTT Mounts $24 Million Funding Led By Salesforce Ventures To Build A More Connected World

26 Apr 2018

IFTTT Platform Customers Have the Opportunity to Integrate with over 600 Devices and Apps
IFTTT, a leading applet creation platform, has announced $24 million in funding led by Salesforce Ventures with participation from IBM, Chamberlain Group, and Fenox Venture Capital. The company is focused on building a more connected world. The new capital will enable IFTTT to hire top talent to take on industry-changing initiatives and expand its platform.
Currently, IFTTT helps app developers to build Applets, and embed them directly into their app or website for consumers.
John Somorjai
At the time of this announcement, John Somorjai, Executive Vice President of Corporate Development and Salesforce Ventures, Salesforce, said, “IFTTT is at the forefront of establishing a more connected ecosystem for devices and services. It’s a prime example of the amazing innovation and commitment to customer success that we look for in our portfolio companies.”
IFTTT is the only platform where consumers, developers, startups, and enterprises are collaborating to build a more connected world. As a result, IFTTT platform customers have the opportunity to integrate with over 600 devices and apps, ranging from smart home to connected cars to social media services, opening up important connections across industries.
A More Connected World, A Better World…
Companies recognize the potential of a more connected world, offering their clients personalized experiences and increasing business efficiency. With its new capital and investors, IFTTT will reach more industries and expand its role as the leading developer platform for the connected world.
Bret Greenstein, Vice President, Watson Internet of Things, IBM, said, “IBM and IFTTT are working together to realize the potential of today’s connected world.  By bringing together IBM’s Watson IoT Platform and Watson Assistant Solutions with consumer-facing services, we can help clients to create powerful and open solutions for their users that work with everything in the Internet of Things.”
Bret added, “Our work together is an important step to enable true interoperability between devices as IoT becomes pervasive across business and society alike.”
IFTTT has grown to more than 14 million consumers, more than 600 published services, and 75 million Applets turned on since its launch. With more than 5,000 active developers building services and more than 140,000 building new Applets on the IFTTT Platform, the company is positioned as an essential tool for a more connected world.
Linden Tibbets
IFTTT CEO Linden Tibbets, said, “Every business is undergoing a dramatic transformation into a digital service. We are on a mission to bring trust and compatibility to a future in which everything around us becomes a new app and another login. We could not be more excited to partner with our new investors, our passionate users, and every business working hard to become a service.”
Applets bring services together to create new experiences for consumers. Consumers can create Applets of their own or turn on existing Applets from their favorite products and brands.
Founded in 2010, IFTTT has raised $63 million in funding from top-tier investors including Andreessen Horowitz, Chamberlain Group, Fenox Venture Capital, IBM, Lerer Hippeau Ventures, NEA, Norwest Venture Partners, Salesforce Ventures and SV Angel.


