PathPartner To Showcase Its Automotive Vision Expertise And Technology Services At Embedded World 2018

22 Feb 2018

Demonstrations Include Advanced Solutions And Jump-Start Components For Driver Monitoring, Traffic Sign Recognition, Object Detection And Performance Optimizations
PathPartner Technology, a product R&D and engineering specialist, today announced that it will demonstrate its latest automotive vision expertise and technology services at Embedded World 2018 (Booth 3A-437) in Nuremberg, Germany from Feb 27th – Mar 1st, 2018.
PathPartner’s demonstrations at Embedded World 2018 will include: 
An in-cockpit camera based advanced driver monitoring solution
Radar technology based forward object detection
Deep learning based traffic sign recognition, and pedestrian and vehicle detection
Fast boot solutions on a range of hardware platforms
“We are extremely excited to be showcasing some of our latest innovations in automotive solutions and services,” said Dipanjan Ghosh, CTO and Head of Automotive at PathPartner. “Our demonstrations combine over a decade of experience in imaging, computer vision and embedded systems, coupled with an unparalleled experience in developing technology solutions for automotive clients across infotainment, ADAS and digital cockpit domains”
One of the key highlights of PathPartner’s demonstrations will be a single camera based Driver Monitoring Solution (DMS), which will be available for commercial evaluation in second half of this year.
“As vehicles become more and more connected and autonomous, auto makers are seeking reliable solutions for enhanced safety,” said Vinay M K, VP R&D for DMS. “While there are several solutions available for driver drowsiness and inattention monitoring, PathPartner’s DMS provides a reliable, low cost, automotive grade, single camera based solution that can be easily customized for our client needs.”
To experience these innovations, visit PathPartner at Booth 3A-437 in Embedded World 2018, Nuremberg, Germany from 27th Feb – 1st Mar, 2018.
PathPartner is product R&D and engineering specialist. We help our clients develop, productize, and maintain advanced technology products. With our full stack engineering services, re-usable solution accelerators, and an unparalleled experience in transforming innovative ideas into full-fledged products, PathPartner provides its clients the advantage of top-of-the-line technologies, superior performance and faster time-to-market. With extensive expertise in embedded systems, computer vision, deep learning, multimedia and imaging technologies, PathPartner provides next-gen technology solutions to customers in automotive, internet of things, intelligent devices and digital media products domain.
Read More: World’s First Accredited Blockchain Training Program To Address Global Shortfall In Blockchain Education


