AI Powers New Levels Of Marketing Transformation

17 Aug 2017

Cover Story in CMO Council’s Latest eJournal Explores the Promise of Artificial Intelligence in Marketing (AIM) and How It Is Powering New Levels of Personalization and Efficiency
All the buzz around the potential of artificial intelligence marketing (AIM) is both captivating and intimidating many marketers. The transformational nature of AIM—from automated chatbots and helpful digital assistants to clever ways to predict behavior and make relevant personal buying suggestions at scale—brings a new paradigm shift to the way marketers interact and engage with audiences across all channels.
Utilizing this vital marketing automation ingredient has become essential to those brands and retailers seeking smarter, better ways to serve customers and ease the path-to-purchase. In addition to powering the real-time, personalized experiences that today’s consumers have come to expect, AIM opens an entirely new realm of possibility when it comes to integrating and extracting value from disparate data sources on a massive scale.
The cover story in the latest issue of PeerSphere—the Chief Marketing Officer (CMO) Council’s quarterly eJournal—explores perspectives from marketing leaders and AI experts and reveals the innumerable benefits marketers can attain from the implementation of AIM. These include differentiating the brand, enriching customer knowledge, creating higher search and ad value, expediting service delivery and problem resolution, and generating greater eCommerce yield and digital marketing performance.
These advantages are critical for today’s marketers, especially considering the challenges that marketers face around real-time personalization and sourcing instant insight from unstructured data, such as social media comments, video, email, etc. In fact, a recent CMO Council study found that only 7 percent of marketers are able to consistently create real-time, personalized engagements for the customers across both digital and physical touchpoints. In addition, another study revealed that marketers have virtually no access to 75 percent of their unstructured data, which is preventing them from being able to deliver more relevant, valued experiences that lead to repeat purchase.
However, perhaps the greatest challenge from AI is also its greatest benefit: The possibilities are virtually endless. While the complexity of AI can be intimidating to many marketers and organizations, its ability to automate processes enables marketers to work smarter and faster and allows them to focus their time more strategically.
The latest issue of PeerSphere is available today and covers topics such as:
How chatbots can help to revamp your social engagement strategy
Stereotypes to avoid when marketing to millennials
The components that most LinkedIn marketing programs are missing
Q&A articles with marketing leaders at T-Mobile and HH Global
Insights from marketing leaders at IBM Watson, Conversica, SAS and more
PeerSphere is available on a complimentary basis to CMO Council members courtesy of our sponsor, Thomson Reuters. For more information or to view the issue online, visit https://cmocouncil.org/authority-leadership/peer-sphere.


