Senior Oracle Executive Janusz Naklicki Joins Synerise

12 Mar 2018

Formerly VP Of Technology Sales At Oracle, Has Joined Synerise, A Technology Company Providing Marketing Solutions Based On Artificial Intelligence
Janusz Naklicki, formerly VP of Technology Sales at Oracle, has joined Synerise, a technology company providing marketing solutions based on Artificial Intelligence. As the Chief Strategy Officer, Naklicki will oversee the expansion of Synerise on the international market.
Janusz Naklicki
Janusz Naklicki will lead the international expansion of Synerise. His responsibilities will include the acquisition of key clients in targeted markets and growth of Synerise global partners network. For the last seventeen years, Naklicki has held a number of senior positions at Oracle. As VP of Technology Sales, he managed teams in over 50 countries from EMEA. Previously he worked with Hewlett-Packard and Sun Microsystems. He earned an MBA from the University of Minnesota, Carlson School of Management with a scholarship from the Fulbright Commission. Additionally, he has completed executive courses at Harvard and Wharton.
The global expansion of Synerise is off to a great start and the arrival of Janusz Naklicki positions us extremely well for success. In the coming months, we plan to make more spectacular acquisitions of proven executive-level talent. Janusz is an exceptionally experienced leader, with knowledge and abilities that will drive our growth on the global market and help us to compete with largest enterprises. In the next two years we want to be one of the biggest companies from the AI and Martech markets. – Jaroslaw Krolewski, CEO, Synerise.
Synerise offers matured, cutting-edge products, allowing businesses to run their entire marketing and sales portfolio in the cloud as the fastest, safest and most agile way to promote growth. It’s the best cloud marketing platform based on Artificial Intelligence in the world. I’m thrilled to join and excited to build on the company’s explosive growth and I look forward to further expanding its global presence. – Janusz Naklicki, Chief Strategy Officer, Synerise.
Synerise is a platform for using data and Artificial Intelligence to help brands better respond to the needs of their customers. These tools include automation and personalization of communication as well as price management in real time and at scale. Synerise continues to invest heavily in intellectual property, data storage capacity and AI team expansion. The AI Growth Cloud from Synerise will soon be available to the global marketplace. Recently, Synerise was chosen by EY to take part in the Accelerating Entrepreneurs 2018 program for the top 30 global technology firms with greatest potential for growth.


