Blockchain & Bitcoin Conference Tallinn To Take Off On March 22

19 Mar 2018

Crypto experts from Europe, Asia and the USA Will Share Their Experience of ICO Carrying Out, Talk About The Blockchain Integration Into Business And Explain How Keep Within The Law When Using Cryptocurrencies
On March 22, Estonia will host a large event dedicated to blockchain, cryptocurrencies and ICO: Blockchain & Bitcoin Conference Tallinn. Crypto experts from Europe, Asia and the USA will share their experience of ICO carrying out, talk about the blockchain integration into business and explain how keep within the law when using cryptocurrencies.
On March 22, Estonia will host a large event dedicated to blockchain, cryptocurrencies and ICO
The reports are divided into four blocks:
Cryptocurrencies and blockchain in business
Stefano Virgilli
Stefano Virgilli, CMO at Copernicus Gold, will tell about blockchain and mining. Amir Kaltak, CEO at LEXIT, the blockchain-based marketplace for selling startups and copyright, will explain how decentralized technologies will disrupt the way companies and their IP are being bought, sold, and licensed. Josh Scigala, CEO at the Bitcoin and gold exchange, will reveal the issue of blockchain and precious metals fusion in a single ecosystem.
A spacious approach to the blockchain application will be presented by two speakers from the Catapult Labs IT company, Aleksander Tsoganov, the Software Engineer, and Heikki Kolk, the Managing Director. Using a specific example, they will explain how to monetize electricity and manage electric power industry with blockchain. COO at Chainium, Florian Batliner-Staber, using the example of the corporate development will show how blockchain-based supranational exchange will change the stock market.
ICO
Alexandra Levin Kramer
Blockchain lawyer and Partner at CKR Law LLP, Alexandra Levin Kramer will give information on how to launch ICO in the USA, staying within the legal framework. The issue of cooperation with the target audience when promoting ICO projects will be covered by Aleks Bozhinov, CMO at Crowdholding. Expert advice on gaining trust of the crypto community when holding ICO will be provided by Martins Liberts, CEO at Debitum Network.
Legal aspects
Thierry Vallat
Thierry Vallat, the founder of Cabinet Thierry Vallat, a former member of Board of Directors, and a treasurer at ‘France-Estonia’ Association, will reveal the regulation prospects of digital assets in Europe. The topic of blockchain application as a trusted entity will be discussed in the report of Edgar Bers, Partner Relations Manager at HashCoins OÜ. Types of tokens and their legal meaning will be revealed in the report of Aviya Arika, the Head of Blockchain Innovation at Nir Porat & Co. Law Firm.
Tech reports
Vladislav Sapozhnikov, Co-Founder and CEO of Deex.Exchange, will tell attendees about the blockchain future in general and BitShares-based decentralized ecosystems in particular. Lukas Kairys, CTO at Cryptodus IT company, will reveal the possibilities and risks of smart contracts, as well as their technological goals.
Venue
The event will be held at the comfortable hotel in the center of Tallinn – Hilton Tallinn Park hotel.
Comprehensive program of the event and registration are available on the website of Blockchain & Bitcoin Conference Tallinn.
Read More: International Blockchain Association – The World’s First Industry Body For The Blockchain Industry


