Argus Worldwide Corp. Eyes Benefits Of Blockchain For Cyber Junky Aggregator

26 Apr 2018

Argus Worldwide Corp. reported today that the Company may extend the development cycle of its Cyber Junky Aggregator to ensure the early integration of blockchain technology into its innovative aggregation platform of goods and services. With Blockchain as a reference point the Company has already begun to ensure close collaboration between advanced engineering teams at Indiabased Tejovat Technologies Pvt Ltd. (www.tejovat.com) and its operations in Gdansk Poland. Argus Worldwide Corp. recently announced the pending acquisition of Tejovat Technologies which is scheduled to close within 30-45 days.
Says Argus Worldwide Chairman Michael Wexler, “Introducing Blockchain into the development of the Cyber junky platform will ensure that we reap all of the advantages of what is truly 21st century  technology. Blockchain will be a game changer for Cyber Junky in enhancing the digital experience for the CJ community.”
Santosh Labade
According to Santosh Labade, President and Chief Engineer at Tejovat Technologies, “Our analysis for integrating blockchain into the CJ aggregator is clear and straightforward. From a technical standpoint the all new CyberJ platform will have its front end designed with the latest front-end design tools and technologies which will give the CyberJ platform a best in class user experience for our customers. The blockchain environment running at middleware ensures the safety, security and accountability of every transaction done through the CyberJ. The tight integration of our smart electronics and the other CyberJ applications with blockchain and our databases with front end tools gives seamless opportunities to our customers through a single user interface. The overall platform efficiency is boosted by our hardware accelerated servers installed at different geographic locations across the globe which ensures all the transactions done through the CyberJ platform are performed concurrently at very high speed as compared to the traditional approach.”


