Cloudian Demonstrates At NAB How Limitlessly Scalable Storage, Metadata, And Hybrid Cloud Solutions Help Speed Workflows And Monetize Content

22 Mar 2018

Case-study presentations illustrate rapid media search and automated data protection benefits of on-premises private cloud and hybrid cloud solutions
Cloudian will host case-study presentations at this year’s NAB Show in Las Vegas at which media professionals from WGBH, Boston’s PBS station, and from an iconic weekend comedy show will discuss strategies to speed workflows, achieve near-instantaneous media search, and enhance asset value with object storage-based private and hybrid cloud storage systems and rich metadata.
Broadcasters and post-production teams face challenges storing, protecting and searching the volume of media generated by today’s high-resolution formats. In this session, which will be presented at the NAB Show on Tuesday, April 10, at 3:30 p.m. in room N256, media professionals will discuss their strategies to meet these challenges by consolidating media into a single, limitlessly scalable environment, employing private and public clouds for automated data protection and using metadata to facilitate faster, more intelligent media search.
Also at NAB, Cloudian will demonstrate in its booth, SL6321, a workflow for media that enables customers to rapidly store, protect and search petabyte-scale media archives. The demonstration will show how cloud-based tools can be used together with Cloudian’s limitlessly scalable storage system to enrich metadata and enable rapid media search using Google-like tools.
Cloudian’s booth will also host presentations from the company’s partners, including Cisco, Quantum, WWT, SME, Komprise, eMAM, Primestream, Evolphin, DataFrameworks, Axle, FileCatalyst, Marquis Broadcast, WiZR, and others that spotlight joint solutions which better address the evolving needs of production and broadcasting professionals.
Shane Miner, senior director of technical services at WGBH, will also present a session titled “How (and Why) We Built a Hybrid Cloud Archive” as part of the co-located Broadcast Engineering and Information Technology Conference. This session will take place on Wednesday, April 11, at 4 p.m. in room N256. The WGBH solution may also be previewed in this video.
Jon Toor
“Many broadcast and production organizations face challenges with archive infrastructures built on tape and external hard-drive media that are hard to manage, search and protect, particularly given the growing popularity of capacity-intensive 4K and 8K media,” said Jon Toor, Cloudian CMO. “A limitlessly scalable active archive built on object storage lets teams save time and derive greater value from their media by consolidating assets to a single pool that can be metadata-enriched, instantly searched and quickly monetized.”
The cloud can also be used to apply AI to data – to search for faces or landmarks, for example – and this metadata can be automatically added to the storage object. This provides a highly granular description of the content and allows Cloudian’s integrated search tool to work increasingly well over time, making it easier and faster to find content.
 


