ADEXT: Why Businesses Need To Prevent Digital Marketing Doom With AI

24 Oct 2017

When it comes to the marketing Industry, AI has played a vital role in process and strategy improvement— to such an extent that experts believe that by 2020, approximately 85% of customer interactions will be operated by AI systems. Many marketers have decided to include AI in their marketing and sales plans since it offers them the possibility to change, diversify and renew their campaigns instantly. It also allows them to better understand their customers and discover their emotions and preferences.
Digital marketing is getting an extreme makeover. Adext explains some of AI’s most outstanding contributions to the field. They will inevitably transform the way the industry works.
1) Because AI Enhances and Customizes The User Experience: Artificial intelligence offers unique solutions that help businesses identify the preferences of their consumers in real time. Imagine knowing what users are thinking when they visit your website; wouldn’t that be a tremendous advantage? Knowing the needs, desires, and preferences of your users before they visit your website gives you the chance to harness your resources wisely and efficiently, and create much more effective communication strategies.
One of the things that will determine whether they like your brand or not is the level of customization you decide to implement. Perhaps this isn’t something new, but with the support of AI it’s possible to customize the user experience in real time, offering each user a unique experience, based on their previous behaviours, demographic information, etc.
2) Conversions are a crucial component of an effective digital marketing strategy: If your techniques and effort aren’t generating any sales for your business or aren’t converting your visitors into leads and your leads into customers, it’s time to incorporate AI into your sales strategy. Long gone are the days when you needed to turn to the phone book to look for customers. Or go knocking on doors without any notice, offering people a product or service they weren’t interested in. Which is even worse.  Fortunately, those days are over and the processes are much faster and effective now.
With the overwhelming number of digital and non-digital media around today, you can have an impact on consumers and influence them from many different angles. But that doesn’t mean that all of them are right for all the businesses.  In order to achieve this impact, AI technologies manage CRM services, showing sale offers to your prospects right when they are looking for them and on the platform they are using.
One example of an AI platform that does this is Adext. It creates, manages and optimizes ads campaigns on the most popular digital media platforms like Google, Facebook, Instagram and many more. And it does it automatically. What’s more, with its intelligent algorithms, it’s capable of analyzing Big Data in real time to detect trends and successful patterns from the campaigns of businesses similar to yours, and then implement them. This way, as time passes, it optimizes your campaigns on an ongoing basis.
With this platform, businesses don’t need to decide which media platform to target. Adext will identify the most profitable ones for the business and redirect the budget towards them.
3) AI Gives You The Benefit Of Accurate Recommendations: A lot of companies are already using AI to generate recommendations or suggestions based on actions users have previously performed.  But what is significant is that as artificial intelligence advances, the amount of data is also increasing, making the experience much more personalized. Machines are getting way better at their jobs and are predicting preferences, needs and desires more accurately.
4) AI Advanced Security Inspires Much More Confidence: Online shopping is definitely a trend that’s here to stay. And reinforcing security in this context is crucial to make the experience more reliable and enticing. It is not enough to simply request a username and a password in order for customers to feel happy about making transactions that involve confidential information anymore.
In these kinds of situations, AI becomes really important. Its advanced programming can alert businesses when it detects any kind of fraud, suspicious breaches or unstructured data. But AI not only identifies impending threats, but also determines risks and amends errors in real time.


