Crypto Collectible ‘Etherbots’ Partners With WAX Tokens And OPSkins Marketplace

17 Feb 2018

Etherbots Is A Blockchain-Based Online Game That Allows Users To Collect, Build And Duel Virtual Robots With Other Players Across The Globe
Etherbots and WAX announced that the company’s Crypto Collectibles will be available on OPSkins, the world’s leading marketplace for online video game assets and are tradeable with WAX Tokens, Bitcoin, US dollars, Euros and dozens of other currencies.
Etherbots is a blockchain-based online game that allows users to collect, build and duel virtual robots with other players across the globe. Their pre-sale recently sold out three days early, with players buying over $1,000,000 USD worth of parts, the most successful game pre-sale to date. Etherbots are comprised of four different parts, each of which are unique and scarce, so every robot is customized to the user, with over four million unique combinations. Users can buy parts and sell unused ones back into the marketplace. The full game is launching on Etherbots Wednesday, February 21st at 10pm Pacific Time and items are expected to be added to OPSkins towards the end of March.
“Having complete ownership of digital assets—being able to trade, transfer and use them with no external control—is a revolutionary idea,” said James Ferguson, Co-Founder of Etherbots. “We wanted to create a game inspired by this innovative concept; one with deeply strategic gameplay, a rewarding economy and assets with real in-game utility. We are excited to be at the forefront of the digital ownership movement, and by the incredible feedback we’ve had so far, so are a lot of our fans.”
Malcolm CasSelle
“The concept of virtual collectible items on the blockchain adds a fresh value proposition to the crypto world,” said Malcolm CasSelle, CIO of OPSkins and President of WAX. “We see OPSkins and WAX as key players in developing our new Crypto Collectibles marketplace, and we’re excited to integrate Etherbots into that ecosystem.”
With the integration of Etherbots onto the OPSkins platform, and WAX Tokens into the Etherbots marketplace, WAX Tokens gain additional utility and more players are incentivized to join the ecosystem.
OPSkins will become the go-to marketplace to trade these Crypto Collectibles, also known as ERC-721 tokens. Etherbots makes the second ERC-721 token to be added to OPSkins and tradable with WAX Tokens — the first was CryptoKitties in December 2017, and there are more to come. OPSkins boasts over two million weekly transactions on its platform, has millions of active customers and adds 200,000 new users each month. WAX allows anyone to create a virtual goods marketplace, onboarding millions of gamers to the growing cryptocurrency space.
Etherbots is a decentralized application hosted on the Ethereum network. Inspired by “Robot Wars”, you can collect parts, forge over four-million unique robots, and use them to battle or trade with other players. Level up and unlock perks which benefit your robots in combat.  Battle and discover rare parts by winning duels in the arena. Win—and you might receive a legendary gold flamethrower to roast your enemies. Lose and you’ll be lucky to find a frying pan. Etherbots recently sold out their presale three days early, with over $1,000,000 worth of parts bought.
WAX is a functional utility token that supports a decentralized platform, enabling anyone to operate a fully functioning virtual marketplace with zero investment in security, infrastructure or payment processing. Developed by the founders of OPSkins, the world’s leading marketplace for online video game assets


