CallMiner Announces Eureka Coach To Provide Contact Center Optimization With Continuous Insight And Closed-Loop Case Management

30 May 2018

Coach provides automated scoring and direct feedback across all agents for self-coaching and data-driven management.
CallMiner, the leading platform provider of award-winning speech and customer engagement analytics, announced today the latest release of its agent performance management platform, now branded Eureka Coach. Eureka Coach is a cloud-based portal that automates and accelerates performance feedback to contact center agents and supervisors based on objective scoring from CallMiner Eureka speech analytics.
Building on the years of success of myEureka, the first agent performance portal in the speech analytics industry, Eureka Coach is the next evolution of automated performance management for supervisors and agents. The solution features role-based graphical dashboards with agent and supervisor views of scoring by individual, team, and contact center-wide performance, as well as directed actions from supervisors to agents. Agents leveraging Coach to self-coach and engage in bi-directional feedback with their supervisors will see improvements in performance and customer experience, which is a key differentiator in competitive markets.
Key features of Coach:
Immediate feedback – Based on automated AI-driven scoring across 100% of all agent interactions
Comparison review – Agent awareness of performance across any user selected timeframes and specific KPIs
Actionable assignments – Supervisor assignments with call detail and coaching notes
Personalized evidence – PCI-redacted call playback with ability to tag specific sections with coaching notes
Sustainable performance management – Ongoing feedback and discussion between supervisors and agents
Bruce McMahon
“Eureka Coach creates a culture of optimization where agents consistently receive feedback on their performance rather than waiting for a monthly coaching session,” said Bruce McMahon, Director of Product Management at CallMiner. “Delivering automated feedback directly to those that can act on it has been proven to drive faster time to insight and faster time to action. With this pervasive intelligence, agents can self-coach and see the immediate impacts of changes in their tactics.”
Coach, currently in live beta testing with several organizations, will be available to CallMiner Eureka users to build on the customized scoring and insights from Eureka.
Dennis J. Christie, Senior Director of Regulatory Compliance at Performant Financial Corporation, said: “We are thrilled with the ease of the new Coach platform and all its enhanced capabilities. We believe this product will make a significant impact on streamlining our auditing process and are extremely excited for the full rollout to take place!”
By giving supervisors and agents access to automated Eureka insight, users can effectively identify the most impactful drivers of customer experience and agent performance derived from every call. “Analytics programs are frequently challenged by a barrier between insight and the actions needed to drive change that impacts the business,” said CallMiner CEO Paul Bernard. “Eureka Coach helps organizations of all sizes bridge this divide to drive real action from the awareness and insight uncovered by Eureka through data-driven encouragement and personalized accountability.” For more information about CallMiner Eureka engagement analytics and Coach, visit www.callminer.com/coach.


