Shyft Unveils Board Of Advisors Comprised Of Top Crypto, Industry, And Regulatory Leaders United To Redefine Identity

25 Jun 2018

Shyft’s Inaugural Group Of Advisors Bring Deep Industry Knowledge From International Business And Finance, Blockchain, Economics, and Know Your Customer (KYC) and Anti Money Laundering (AML) Compliance
Shyft, a leading blockchain-based solution that is building a trusted ecosystem to enable secure and private data transfers, has announced its high profile Board of Advisors. Shyft’s inaugural group of advisors bring deep industry knowledge from international business and finance, blockchain, economics, and Know Your Customer (KYC) and Anti Money Laundering (AML) compliance. The Board of Advisors will play a critical role in providing strategic guidance across multiple dimensions in Shyft’s mission to make the global economy more efficient and effectively regulated.
Joseph Weinberg
Shyft International Chairman Joseph Weinberg says: “At Shyft, we are ambitiously working to redefine the broken way our world uses and thinks about data, the same data that today defines our identity. Our group of advisors understand the dire need for a new system that allows attested data to not only be shared securely and privately, but also a system that can help build reputational identity from this data that can be used globally across borders. This type of identity-based on trustworthiness and credibility helps build a global economy that empowers the 3.5 billion people that are currently ‘underidentified’ and ‘unbanked,’ meaning that they are unable to participate in regulatory economies. Our caliber of advisors is second to none in the industry, which a testament to the enormity of the problem and to Shyft as the solution.”
Read More: Quanergy Solid State LiDAR Wins Juniper Research Top Automotive Award
Shyft’s advisors have diverse backgrounds, experiences and broad networks, and can individually and collectively provide unique perspective and strategic direction on the global and complex topic of identity, compliance and privacy, and how a disruptive technology like blockchain can solve a global problem. The advisors were carefully selected to include experts in finance, business, regulation, data privacy, and compliance and AML expertise. The Shyft Board of Advisors includes:
Joseph Weinberg — Shyft Chairman; Paycase CEO; Think Tank Specialist to the OECD
Meltem Demirors — Chief Strategy Officer, CoinShares; Member of Global Future Council on Blockchain, World Economic Forum
Daniel Kornitzer — EVP and Chief Business Development Officer, Paysafe Group
Anthony Di Iorio — CEO & Founder, Decentral and Jaxx; Ethereum Co-founder
Brock Pierce – Chairman, Bitcoin Foundation
Charlie Schrem — Founder,  Bitcoin Foundation and Crypto.IQ
Ben Gorlick — Investor; Chief of Strategy, Paycase; Founder / COO CLoudHashing; CTO CrowdMachine, Blockstream, Peer Nova
Marat Kichikov — Managing Partner,  CaBitfurypital
Peter Warrack — Chief Compliance Officer, Bitfinex; Director, AML Advisory and Compliance Officer at Bank of Montreal
Jeremy Bornstein — SVP and Group Head, Mastercard Canada
Diego Gutiérrez Zaldívar — CEO and Cofounder, RSK labs; President and Cofounder, Koibanx
Desmond McKenzie — Blockchain & Ecosystem Expert, Tata Consultancy Services
Lord Meghnad Desai — Noted Economist; Lord Speaker in the British House of Lords
Lord Anthony St John — Expert on Foreign Affairs and Clean Technology; Member of British House of Lords
Loretta Joseph — OECD Think Tank Advisor; Australian Digital Chamber of Commerce Chair
Dr. Jane Thomason — CEO, Blockchain Quantum Impact
Eyal Herzog — Product Architect, Bancor
Meltem Demirors shares: “Shyft is addressing one of the most challenging issues in our financial system – connecting identity and reputation to legacy financial products and emerging blockchain based financial services.”
Anthony Di Iorio says: “Blockchain and the decentralized economy is about empowering individuals to take control of their digital lives. Today, most institutions hold centralized databases vulnerable to cyberattacks and the masses don’t have control. When I learned of Shyft’s vision to remove borders around personal identity using blockchain, I realized the full influence they will have on the whole global economy and the way we think about digital identity. To me, that is exciting.”
Lord Anthony St. John concludes: “Having spent almost 25 years in the financial services in London, I see on a daily basis how KYC and proper due diligence are of pivotal importance. I also proudly serve on the House of Lords Ad Hoc Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence and am a member of the Parliamentary IT Committee. I am lucky to have a seat the intersection of finance and regulation and appreciate that compliance and due diligence are instrumental to the success of any business. However, KYC procedures are often cumbersome, time-consuming and inefficient. Shyft is unique in that it will deliver a trustworthy, resilient, expeditious, cost-effective and accredited platform.”
In efforts to build and connect the many ecosystems that deal with data and identity today, Shyft will be featuring individual dialogue and commentary from its advisors through its various channels starting in early July.
Read More: Think Next: Microsoft For Startups China Enables Chinese Innovations To “Go Global” And Overseas Innovations To “Go China”


