Visa Puts Future Of Payments In The Spotlight At EMerge Americas 2018

17 Apr 2018

Join Visa to experience how non-traditional players – like fintechs, startups and developers – are collaborating with traditional ecosystem players to build the future of commerce
At this year’s eMerge Americas conference in Miami (April 23-24), Visa will demonstrate the latest payments technologies showing how Visa is making it easier for everyone around the world to pay and get paid.
Visa Developer Challenge: On Tuesday, Visa will host a live competition at the Launchpad of eMerge Americas, where local developers culminate a month-long challenge to build and design solutions that solve a particular consumer or business challenge. The winner will be announced on the main stage Tuesday afternoon.
Women in Tech: Also on Tuesday, Vanesa Meyer, vice president of global products and solutions for Visa Latin America, will take the stage for the Women, Innovation & Technology “Leading Ladies” panel, participating in a candid conversation about key lessons from her career in payments, her impact in the technology industry and the work she has done to empower future generations of female leaders.
Innovation Exhibit: Visa’s innovation space (booth 811) will enable Emerge attendees to experience the life of the Connected Consumer, powered by Visa’s push payments platform – Visa Direct. Attendees will have the chance to interact with various payment technologies that make paying fast, easy and secure. From the comfort of home to a local Café, Visa works with key industry players to drive payments innovation around the world. Examples will include:
Chatbot: Ideated from a co-creation session in our Innovation Studio in Brazil, this virtual assistant can check an account balance, deliver a virtual card and provide instant promotions – all via a Chatbot.
Virtual Reality: Experience the future of commerce by making a “virtual payment” for your favorite garments.
QR Code: Scan a QR code to discover how easy it is to make payments without relying on cash.
Contactless: Discover how contactless payments are the catalyst for the next generation of payments, and the gateway for the countless possibilities in the world of connected devices.
Push Payments: Experience how Visa Direct is transforming person-to-person payments, and the shared-service economy, by making real-time payments1 directly from a TV screen.
Attention Startups:
Join Visa at the Startup Showcase, where Visa technology experts will be mentoring and judging the participants, on Tuesday morning at the Launch Pad.
Visa believes collaboration is the key to innovation. One of the ways Visa accomplishes this is through Visa’s Everywhere Initiative, a global innovation program that tasks start-ups to solve commerce challenges of tomorrow. Visa, will soon make key announcements for its 2018 edition in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Immediately following eMerge Americas, Visa is hosting Visa PayTech Day, an exclusive event on April 25 for fintechs and payment providers that are focused on growing the adoption of payments services in Latin America & Caribbean. Discussions around how Visa’s products, fraud management and engagement models address new marketplace challenges and changing requirements will take place from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. at the new 500 Startups venue in Downtown Miami.


