Tact.ai Accelerates Sales Transformation At Fortune 500 Customers By Bringing CRM To The Intelligent Edge

15 Nov 2017

First omnichannel AI-powered assistant for sales teams named 2017 Digital Innovation Award Winner by Ventana Research
Tact.ai, the sales experience platform for the intelligent edge, announced further expansion of the Tact Sales Assistant among its Fortune 500 customers. The company furthered its integration with LinkedIn, becoming the first omnichannel AI-powered assistant on the new LinkedIn Sales Navigator Application Platform. Tact.ai was also selected over 27 companies spanning 9 different categories as the winner of the 2017 Digital Innovation Awards by Ventana Research, and saw two of its Fortune 100 customers highlighted in a report on sales transformation successes.
Tact.ai changes how salespeople work at Fortune 500 customers like GE, Cisco Systems, Kelly Services and others by delivering the first omnichannel AI-powered digital assistant for sales teams. By leveraging the generational platform shift from PC browser-based apps to the new world of mobile, voice and conversational AI-powered experiences, the Tact Sales Assistant acts as a salesperson’s single pane of glass over customer data scattered across CRM, LinkedIn, Zendesk, email, calendar, Box, OneDrive and legacy databases. For companies struggling with CRM adoption, Tact’s frictionless experience and contextual insights deliver greater sales productivity, higher win rates, and faster sales cycles.
Tact.ai was appointed the winner of the 2017 Digital Innovation Awards for “helping organizations innovate or enhance the productivity and outcomes” of their digital transformation initiatives. Ventana Research picked a group of finalists that “showcase advances in the productivity and potential of business applications as well as technology that contributes significantly to improved efficiency, productivity and the performance of an organization” and awarded Tact.ai with the highest scores out of all companies in this year’s competition.
As one of the six sales acceleration companies selected as a launch partner, Tact.ai became the first omnichannel AI powered assistant to integrate with the new LinkedIn Sales Navigator Application Platform. Sellers now get fuller and more consistent representation of LinkedIn people and company profiles, expanded search capabilities and strong reporting to align sales analytics and initiatives across teams using different systems.
Sales leaders from GE, Cisco, and IBM outlined their best approaches to steering successful sales transformation in a new report, revealing how these global organizations aligned goals from numerous departments — such as reduced sales cycles, greater data fidelity and tighter organizational collaboration through deal closure — to offer its salespeople a new kind of selling experience.


