ShowCoin Listed On OKEx Platform For Trading To Help Content Producers Achieve Ultimate Revenue

31 Jan 2018

SHOW Platform (SHOW), the decentralized interactive live streaming platformbased on the ETH Blockchain infrastructure, has officially started trading. Its ShowCoin, the digital virtual cryptocurrency with a peer-to-peer network of Blockchain and smart contracts designed for live–streaming, digital entertainment content distribution services and products, has been listed on 7 major world-class exchanges: OKEx, Bigone, Bibox, KKcoin, SHUZIBI, CEX and Coin900.
“We are privileged to have ShowCoin in the market,” said Mr. Hu Zhensheng, founder and CEO of SHOW. “Centered on ShowCoin, SHOW has formed an economic system with a decentralized, interactive, live–streaming entertainment solution that can reduce the cost of issuing digital entertainment assets to its theoretical minimum value.”
ShowCoin is issued based on smart contracts and applies Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT), which is indicative of the Blockchain, the trading of which will be open, transparent, non-modifiable and traceable. It can automatically open and close resources and services to other partners using smart contracts, while supporting automatic clearing to reduce the consumption of resources when providing services to producers.
Reward system to create a digital win-win ecosystem
Integrating with ShowCoin, SHOW has established a fair and free ecosystem that involves content producers, service providers related to content production (agents and designers) and end consumers, where every tradable product and service provided by members in the chain can be put into built-in stores for bidding. At the same time, consumers can gain scores by behavior, such as sending gifts, consuming tokens, and effectively sharing content.
These activities will bring more tokens as rewards. With higher layers of effective forwarding, the rewards will be increased exponentially. Meanwhile, positive feedback from consumers will motivate content providers.
Control system to guarantee fair trade
SHOW also has a strict regulation and risk-control system. By applying an “Acceleration of Gravity Algorithm,” it can reduce the influence of voting as time goes by, preventing wealthy consumers from voting repeatedly while not compromising the income of content producers.
“The decentralized structure will have a brighter future, as it is the ultimate formation of human society,” said Mr. Hu Zhensheng. “We are building a digital entertainment ecosystem to bond content providers and consumers and bring the power of the crowd to its utmost potential on the Internet for the coming decades.”


