Esri Partners With Alibaba Cloud For Location Intelligence Technology

13 Apr 2018

New Partnership Agreement Allows Esri’s Excellence in GIS to Include Alibaba Cloud’s Cloud Computing Expertise
Esri, a leading mapping data and spatial analytics, has announced that it has entered into a partnership with Alibaba Cloud, the cloud computing subsidiary of the Alibaba Group. The new agreement will enable the partners to provide enhanced capabilities to customers seeking to implement Esri’s technology on the Alibaba Cloud.
Esri engineers the most advanced solutions for the digital transformation, the Internet of Things (IoT), and location analytics to inform the most authoritative maps in the world. 
Jack Dangermond
Jack Dangermond, President and Founder, Esri, described the agreement as both a recognition of successful implementations and a shared belief that location intelligence in cloud infrastructure was pivotal to addressing customers’ needs and solving real-world problems – especially those that need scalable computing, storage, and networking capabilities.
Jack said, “We’ve seen our users achieve amazing results already with Esri technology in the Alibaba Cloud. This has been possible as both organizations have engineered interoperable and compatible technology, based on industry standards. The agreement will now bring our engineers together to collaborate on shared initiatives that deliver the next wave of location intelligence innovation on the cloud.”
Esri’s sole authorized distributor in Mainland China, Esri China, has a proven track record in helping customers implement Esri technology on the Alibaba Cloud. The Ningxia Land and Resources Bureau has built their own foundational geospatial data platform using Esri’s ArcGIS Enterprise technology on the Alibaba Cloud. The customer has consolidated their electronic map data, imagery, survey, and 3-dimensional data into a “one-stop” catalog used by all functions and levels of the Ningxia Autonomous Region government.
Esri China’s President, Frances Ho, has witnessed the rapid migration of location intelligence capabilities to cloud infrastructure and believes that this will continue. Frances said, “Organizations are rapidly adopting geographic information systems (GIS) and combining it with the capabilities of cloud technology.”
Frances added, “Our users already rely on the ArcGIS Enterprise and the Alibaba Cloud to do this reliably and efficiently, using world-class innovation from our GIS experts in China, the United States, and around the world.”


