Robin8 Announces Cross-chain Ethereum Integration To Expand Robin8 Profile Management Ecosystem To Ethereum Users

21 May 2018

Our vision is to give users the control of their data by having the Robin8 profile management ecosystem (PMES) software integrated in every application
Only weeks after a successful launch of the Robin8 Blockchain Studio and the profile management ecosystem on the Qtum mainnet, the Robin8 Foundation has announced today its plans to expand the Robin8 DApp (Decentralized Application) to support the Ethereum platform as well as others in forthcoming announcements per our product roadmap. This will open the profile management ecosystem more users, which will facilitate the return of the profile data back to the owner and empower everyone with their data.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive
After launching the PMES months ahead of schedule, the Robin8 team is confident in supporting multiple chains without affecting the original plan for the Qtum chain.
To facilitate Robin8’s support of Ethereum, and to ensure that the platform is jointly managed by users from both communities, the Robin8 Foundation will issue a new token, EPUT (Ethereum Profile Utility Token), based on the Ethereum ERC20 token model standard. The EPUT will have a 100,000,000 token supply.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
In order to protect the rights of PUT holders, Robin8 will distribute EPUT as a free airdrop to PUT holders at a 1:1 ratio via participating exchange partners. This token is purely a utility token for the purpose of enabling access to the Robin8 profile management ecosystem by Ethereum users.
The Robin8 Foundation, as the current holder of about 58% of total PUT, will also receive the corollary EPUT tokens. The Foundation will disclose and publicize the wallet addresses of both the PUT and EPUT tokens held by the Foundation to ensure transparency. Both EPUT and PUT will follow the original plan laid out in the white paper to lock the PUT and EPUT tokens for the original duration.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World


