Nexus Earth Partners With SingularityNET To Integrate Artificial Intelligence With The World’s Most Advanced & Secure Blockchain Technology

05 Feb 2018

Nexus (NXS), announced a partnership with SingularityNET (AGI), to explore the combination of both technologies. SingularityNET is looking to expand horizons creating a decentralized AI network based on blockchain. This new partnership could result in the most secure, scalable and censorship-resistant blockchain AI infrastructure in existence.
Nexus and SingularityNET share an aligned mission of creating the safest and most advanced technology. In discussing the future of secure, decentralized AI, SingularityNET Chairman David Hanson commented, “It will become the single most valuable technology in all of history. This is the chance for us to change the world together.” SingularityNET will also be exploring the use of Nexus’ satellite-based alternative internet protocol. The integration with Nexus would strengthen its mission of creating a censorship-resistant AI network, democratizing access in a manner no other project could achieve.
Benefits/implications of the partnership
For Nexus, the partnership presents a valuable use-case for deploying its 3D Chain architecture and exploring AI applications on layers 1 and 2 of its network. Both of these groundbreaking advancements in blockchain technology will become available in 2018.
Founder and Chief Architect of Nexus Colin Cantrell explains, “Nexus wants to resist the centralization of AI and believes partnering with SingularityNET can contribute to AI safety.” In a truly decentralized AI network, having rules contracted into AI decision making helps assure it will be used for good. Cantrell continues, “Nexus and SingularityNET are exploring new systems together in order to create a reliable means of self-regulating trust and reputation in a trustless system. This can make AI’s safer and more resilient when some of their decisions have to be routed through an immutable contract, ‘such as protect this human.'”
For SingularityNET, the partnership creates scalability, accessibility and security for its AI network. This creates safer, more advanced AI in a way the world has never seen. The partnership helps propel both companies forward in realizing their mutual aim of distributing powerful technologies. Nexus and SingularityNET both share the same mission – to create the safest and most advanced technology in the world.


