Serial Entrepreneur Ben Lamm Launches Artificial Intelligence Startup Hypergiant

21 Feb 2018

Comprises Three Divisions: Hypergiant Space Age Solutions, Which Works With Fortune 500s to Develop AI Solutions; Hypergiant Applied Sciences, Which Aims To Commercialize AI Innovations; and Hypergiant Ventures, The Company’s Investment Arm
Ben Lamm
Dallas serial entrepreneur Ben Lamm, who co-founded Dallas’ Conversable and Austin’s Chaotic Moon, has launched his next business venture aimed at capitalizing on artificial intelligence.
His new company, Hypergiant, which he co-founded with partners John Fremont and Will Womble, comprises three divisions: Hypergiant Space Age Solutions, which works with Fortune 500s to develop AI solutions; Hypergiant Applied Sciences, which aims to commercialize AI innovations; and Hypergiant Ventures, the company’s investment arm. It launches with more than 20 employees and generates revenue from more than 10 Fortune 500 clients including TGI Friday’s, Wingstop, Bosch, HarperCollins and Schulmberger and with five strategic partnerships including GE and Adobe. It also is backed by investors including Mythic Ventures, Align Capital, Beringer Capital, entrepreneur Tony Robbins and Austin-based Capital Factory.
Hypergiant, which has offices in Austin, Dallas and Houston, already has 10 Fortune 500 customers including TGI Friday’s, Bosch and Schlumberger, six strategic partnerships including Adobe and General Electric.
The company has already made three investments in Austin-based companies focused on AI including Cerebri AI, Clearblade and Pilosa.
Hypergiant has three divisions including Hypergiant Space-Age Solutions, Hypergiant Applied Sciences and Hypergiant Ventures.
The news comes nearly two years after Lamm co-founded Conversable, which initially launched with Wingstop. It has since gained traction with companies including Pizza Hut and Whole Foods and developed partnerships with EY, Booze Allen Hamilton, and Credera.The company has more than 20 employees.
Hypergiant launches with three divisions, more than 10 clients, and more than 20 employees.
Read More: Crypto Collectible ‘Etherbots’ Partners With WAX Tokens And OPSkins Marketplace


