Brain Corp Announces Strategic Investment In Mobile Robotics Company Savioke

16 Jul 2018

Creators of robotic operating system BrainOS® part of Savioke’s $13.4M Series B
Brain Corp, an AI company specializing in the development of self-driving technology for robots, today announced its investment in Savioke, developer of Relay, the first indoor service robot that works safely, securely and reliably in public environments including hotels and hospitals. As part of its participation in the Series B funding round, Silicon Valley-based Savioke will also license BrainOS, a software platform streamlining the development, deployment and management of mobile robots.
“We have experienced strong success automating the floor care industry, and as part of our growth strategy, are now introducing the BrainOS platform across a multitude of other applications. Supporting leading robotics companies that can leverage BrainOS to accelerate their robotic development is one of our primary development objectives”
Brain Corp partners with original equipment manufacturers to integrate BrainOS into their manually driven machines, allowing for smart, self-driving capabilities. As a global leader in robotic floor care, its autonomous cleaning machines operate daily in crowded environments, such as malls, airports and retail stores. Brain Corp’s partnership with Savioke extends the reach of BrainOS into hospitality, healthcare and logistics.
Follow Us
“We have experienced strong success automating the floor care industry, and as part of our growth strategy, are now introducing the BrainOS platform across a multitude of other applications. Supporting leading robotics companies that can leverage BrainOS to accelerate their robotic development is one of our primary development objectives,” said Brain Corp Co-founder and CEO Eugene Izhikevich. “Savioke has a unique product, early traction and experienced leadership. We are confident Savioke and Brain Corp will make ideal partners as we work together to make robots part of our day-to-day lives.”
Steve Cousins
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
“Working with Brain Corp’s BrainOS platform will help Savioke scale efficiently to quickly deliver robotic solutions to our customers and partners in the global healthcare, hospitality and logistics markets,” said Steve Cousins, CEO of Savioke and founder of the open-source Robot Operating System (ROS). “As we continue to expand, BrainOS will allow us to better focus our internal development efforts on customer-specific applications and environments.”
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs


