AI Startup We Build Bots Creates Chatbot To Answer Questions About Itself

28 Mar 2018

Tech Startupp Employs Its Own Technology To Showcase Investment Opportunity
AI startup We Build Bots has created a chatbot to showcase its expertise whilst answering questions from potential investors following the launch of a crowdfunding campaign.
The Bristol and Cardiff based business which has already secured backing from Development Bank Wales are seeking to raise match funding of £500,000 through Seedrs, Europe’s leading crowdfunding campaign.
We Build Bots has developed an Artificial Intelligence (AI) driven customer service automation platform called IntelAgent, which applies (AI) to conversations which are captured through messaging apps, SMS, email, social media and voice assistants to automate answers, perform tasks and even identify sales opportunities. Put simply, IntelAgent can handle many of the common queries traditionally managed by a call centre, freeing up staff time to deal with the more complex issues.
With big brand customers including The AA, Amnesty International, Welsh Water and Future Publishing already employing its services, We Build Bots will use the capital raised through crowdfunding to help it scale nationally and internationally.
Launched in March 2018 over 55% of the target was reached in the first 10 days, with over £273,000 from 153 investors. With a pre raise valuation of £2m, CEO Paul Shepherd plans to grow the business into a £100m company within the next five years.
To help answer investor questions, the bot experts have created a bot of their own on Facebook Messenger, to answer common investor questions on topics about the team, traction, and business USP and to showcase how their tool works so would be investors can experience it first hand.  Using Facebook messenger Live investors can move from the bot to a member of the team or be routed onto the Seedrs campaign page for additional detail.
CEO Paul Shepherd said: “Using a bot to promote investment in our bots was the obvious choice, enabling us to showcase the technology we’re asking for investment in. We’ve had a flying start to the campaign with over 55% of our funding target achieved in the first 10 days and anticipate reaching our goal within the funding period, enabling us to embark on the next phase of growth.
“Messenger platforms continue to grow rapidly in popularity with Facebook messenger alone having more than a billion active monthly users and over 2 million exchanges between organizations and the public each month. Using AI chatbots to learn answers can save time for business and improve the experience for customers, getting the information they need quicker and allowing those working in customer services to focus on the more hard to handle queries.”


