USens And Fortune Techgroup Co. Form Strategic Partnership To Bring Hand Gesture Interaction To Smart Homes

23 Apr 2018

uSens, Inc. has reached a strategic partnership with Shanghai Fortune Techgroup Co. to bring hand and gesture tracking technology to smart home devices. uSens’s pioneering HCI technology will reshape how consumers control IoT devices industry wide.
uSens, Inc., a pioneer in HCI and computer vision hand and gesture tracking solutions, has reached a strategic partnership with Shanghai Fortune Techgroup Co., a distributor of wireless communication and sensor semiconductors. The goal of the partnership is to proliferate the use of hand and gesture tracking technology within smart homes, where a more natural and intuitive HCI solution is needed.
“We believe that pairing gesture and voice control for IoT devices will make as big an impact as the mouse and keyboard did in the computer industry,”
Anli He
“We believe that pairing gesture and voice control for IoT devices will make as big an impact as the mouse and keyboard did in the computer industry,” said uSens CEO Anli He. “Voice control may be the current preferred interaction method for operating smart home and IoT devices, but the proliferation of virtual and augmented reality technology is changing that. Public comfort with AR technology has increased alongside the growing popularity and accessibility of mobile AR platforms like our uSensAR, which brings AR experiences to the entire Android ecosystem. We predict that as more people experience the benefits of AR tech, the companies that integrate it into their IoT devices will be the most successful. We’re excited for pushing the industry forward alongside Fortune Techgroup.”
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence and voice recognition technology, major technology companies have successively introduced smart home-related products, and traditional household electrical appliance companies have also begun to pay more attention to smart homes. According to market research firm Markets and Markets, the global smart home market is expected to reach $122 billion in 2020, with an annual average growth forecast of 14 percent. Smart home product categories include lighting, security, heating, air conditioning, entertainment, medical care, kitchen supplies and more.
Fortune Techgroup was established in 2000 to provide leading customization and R&D in order to develop technologies that improve quality of life. As part of their Smart Home solutions, the company integrates wireless technologies such as WiFi, Bluetooth, Zigbee, and NB-IOT, while utilizing built-in fingerprint recognition, speech recognition, gesture recognition, face recognition and other biometric algorithms. Their technology is primarily built on the Qualcomm Snapdragon processor platform.


