Aeryon To Sponsor First Public Safety UAS Forum At AUVSI XPONENTIAL

04 May 2018

Aeryon increases its presence at AUVSI Xponential, the world’s largest unmanned systems conference in Denver, CO.
Aeryon Labs Inc. announced they are the premier sponsor for the first ever AUVSI Public Safety UAS Forum scheduled for May 1-2 at XPONENTIAL in Denver, CO. The two-day forum, co-produced by AUVSI and the National Public Safety UAS Council (NPCSU), will cover various public safety topics from humanitarian response in the aftermath of disasters, to integrating UAS into police and fire service operations, search and rescue and more.
John Bagocius
“From aiding in search and rescue operations, to streamlining traffic accident reconstructions, Aeryon’s high-performance Unmanned Aircraft Systems can be a game-changer for a wide range of public safety operations,” said John Bagocius, Vice President of Public Safety Solutions in North America. “We’re working with fire and police agencies to build successful and growing UAS programs and we’re thrilled to help build a community for public safety UAS operators to share best practices and lessons learned.”
Interested AUVSI attendees can register for the UAS Publicy Safety Forum here: https://goo.gl/R1ZNwv
Along with their involvement in the Public Safety Forum, Aeryon Labs and Aeryon Defense USA, are also hosting a floor exhibit showcasing their latest UAS technology. Both companies can be found in the XPO hall at Booth #2207.
At various times during the XPO Aeryon will conduct live flight demonstrations in the outdoor drone demonstration area located on the top level of the the Denver Convention Center parking garage. Those interested in viewing the outdoor flight demonstrations can find the full schedule here: https://goo.gl/9XyJFt.
Brian Wynne
Finally, Aeryon Labs has been named a finalist in the XCELLENCE Awards by the Association for Unmanned Vehicles Systems International (AUVSI) for their humanitarian and disaster relief work after Hurricane Irma. Aeryon was selected from a pool of accomplished applicants as one of eight finalists for the Humanitarian Award, sponsored by DJI. Winners will be announced during the keynote session on Thursday, May 3 at AUVSI XPONENTIAL at the Colorado Convention Center in Denver.
“The unmanned systems industry is innovating at an incredible rate and creating tremendous benefits for our economy, lifestyle and society,” said Brian Wynne, president and CEO of AUVSI. “The XCELLENCE awards give us a chance to recognize the companies and individuals who are propelling the industry into the future.”


