Exiger Announces $80 Million Minority Growth Capital Investment By Carrick Capital Partners

09 Jul 2018

Exiger, the leader in the provision of technology-enabled regulatory, financial crime, risk and compliance solutions, announced today that Carrick Capital Partners (“Carrick”), an investment firm focused on supporting the scaling of technology and technology-enabled services companies has invested $80 million. The minority stake will support Exiger in their delivery of leading edge RegTech solutions to global financial institutions and corporations.
Exiger is the leading provider of technology-enabled, sustainable compliance solutions for the financial and corporate marketplace. Its combination of multi-disciplinary subject matter expertise and disruptive purpose-built technology is changing the way global financial institutions and corporations tackle their biggest and most expensive risk and compliance challenges.
Carrick will provide capital to help Exiger accelerate its growth by continuing to build out and acquire differentiated technology and technology-enabled solutions. Exiger will continue to introduce disruptive technology, operationally scale and evolve how global financial institutions and corporations manage their financial crime compliance processes.
Follow Us
Mike Cherkasky
Mike Cherkasky, Exiger’s Executive Chairman, said, “Michael Beber and I established Exiger with one objective:  to move financial institutions and corporations to a sustainable compliance environment by implementing purpose-built, cost-effective, technology-enabled solutions developed by leading technologists working side-by-side with financial crime compliance experts. Five years since our founding, onerous regulations continue to evolve globally with the cost of compliance showing no sign of abating. Carrick’s capital and business-building expertise will help us accelerate what is already an incredibly fast-growing company.”
Michael Beber
Michael Beber, Exiger’s President and CEO noted, “Carrick’s deep knowledge of Artificial Intelligence (“AI”), specifically Machine Learning (“ML”) and Natural Language Processing (“NLP”), will benefit DDIQ, our industry-first, AI-based RegTech solution purpose-built to disrupt and fundamentally improve KYC onboarding, monitoring and refresh and transaction alert clearing and adjudication in a cost effective, consistent, auditable manner. Paired with Carrick’s network and demonstrated track record as operators, we could not have picked a better business partner to assist us in scaling Exiger’s technology tools, talent and culture.”
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
“Thematically, we have been seeking to invest in a GRC platform that helps global banks and multinational corporations solve their critical financial crime compliance challenges.  Exiger’s approach – combining true subject matter expertise and subscription-based, purpose-built solutions like DDIQ and Insight 3PM – is truly unique,” said Jim Madden, Co-founder and Managing Director of Carrick and newly appointed Board member of Exiger.  “We love investing in founder-led businesses, particularly with like-minded leaders such as Mike Cherkasky and Michael Beber who have successfully built, managed and grown technology-enabled companies.”
“At Carrick, we always look for opportunities to invest with companies that are transforming industries – and Exiger is a great example,” said Mike Salvino, Managing Director of Carrick and newly appointed Board member of Exiger. “Banks – more than ever before – need to come to terms with the escalating costs of compliance and Exiger’s industry-leading, AI-powered solutions, have set them apart in creating unprecedented efficiencies while meeting regulators’ requirements for consistency and auditability. This investment represents an exciting opportunity for Carrick to help Exiger fully achieve their vision to transform the global compliance industry.”
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance


