DBOT ATS LLC Inc Announces The Official Launch Of Blockchain-Powered Crowd Funding And Secondary Market

05 Jan 2018

The Blockchain-Powered Platform Is The First-Of-Its-Kind Alternative Trading System (ATS) Focused On Over-The-Counter Securities To Support Cryptographic Tokens For Sec Registered Securities
DBOT ATS LLC makes capital raising and trading simple with an all-in-one system that supports a multi-tenant issuing portal, secondary trading and a blockchain ledger. The first to market solution reduces transaction cost and settlement time compared to current portals for crowd funded equities issued under Regulation A+.
Historically, investing in a crowd funded early stage company meant holding the security for a long amount of time because of the inherent lack of liquidity in those securities and the difficulty in transferring ownership. By combining issuance and secondary market and offering a hybrid of physical paper with blockchain-based smart-contract tokens, DBOT ATS has made a significant improvement in the investment process with a frictionless path from initial investment to liquidation and settlement of the transaction.
DBOT ATS Portal offers companies a simple process to raise capital. A company would just register and step through a template to create a tokenized security deal either using Regulation D, A+ or CF and once approve they are ready to accept new investments online. Investors can browse new deals on the website, request access to a deal and then fund an account either with crypto currencies or cash to pledge an investment. Shares offered through Reg A+ are traditionally eligible for resale by investors in the secondary market upon completion of an offering.
Shawn Sloves
“This is a great achievement for DBOT ATS and a major step forward for the crowd funding industry.” says Shawn Sloves board member of the Delaware Board of Trade holding company and CEO of Fundamental Interactions. “The system being blockchain based signifies the start of the fusion of traditional and decentralized markets in a regulated entity, where securitized tokens become a reality for secondary trading.”


