Scientific Games Names Robert O’Connor Senior Vice President Of Government Affairs

13 Mar 2018

Scientific Games Corporation announced the appointment of Robert O’Connor as Senior Vice President of Government Affairs, reporting directly to Chief Executive Officer Kevin Sheehan.
In this role, O’Connor will be responsible for developing and executing Scientific Games’ global government relations and public affairs to support the Company’s long-term strategies and raise its profile globally to support its existing business, new sector growth opportunities and emerging markets.
Kevin Sheehan
“Rob brings nearly three decades of government service and advocacy experience at the global, federal, state and local levels,” said Scientific Games Chief Executive Officer Kevin Sheehan. “We look forward to capitalizing on his leadership, as we continue to grow and prosper in current jurisdictions, as well as expand into newly regulated territories.”
Robert O’Connor joins Scientific Games from Goldman Sachs, where he served as Vice President, Executive Office, Government Affairs. At Goldman Sachs, he managed political, legislative and regulatory advocacy with the U.S. Senate, U.S. House of Representatives and led company advocacy efforts in New York State, New York City and New Jersey. He also served as Treasurer of the Goldman Sachs Political Action Committee (GS PAC).
Prior to Goldman Sachs, O’Connor served as Majority Staff Director for the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Homeland Security, where he led all Committee operations, strategy and personnel management. As Staff Director, he oversaw the successful passage of four significant pieces of legislation that were signed into law. Previously, he was Chief of Staff to U.S. Rep. Peter King(NY).
O’Connor is a member of a number of alumni and veteran organizations, including Veterans on Wall Street(VOWS). In 2011, he was selected as a Rockefeller Fellow with the Partnership for New York City.
O’Connor is a graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point with a Bachelor of Science in General Engineering.


