Ternio Joins IAB, Hyperledger, Linux Foundation And AdLedger To Help Push Blockchain Standards In Digital Advertising

09 Mar 2018

Ternio, the first company to provide a scalable blockchain solution for programmatic digital advertising, announced it has joined four different organizations to help accelerate the creation and adoption of blockchain standards in programmatic digital advertising. These groups include the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB), Hyperledger, Linux Foundation and AdLedger Consortium.
Ternio
“Ternio is situated at the intersection of blockchain and digital advertising,” said Bryant Maroney, CTO and co-founder of Ternio. “Our membership in these organizations enables us to bring a macro view of the industry and best practices to help set a standard between these two communities.”
The Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) empowers the media and marketing industries to thrive in the digital economy. Its membership is comprised of more than 650 leading media and technology companies that are responsible for selling, delivering and optimizing digital advertising or marketing campaigns. The trade group fields critical research on interactive advertising, while also educating brands, agencies and the wider business community on the importance of digital marketing. In affiliation with the IAB Tech Lab, it develops technical standards and best practices.
Hyperledger is an open source collaborative effort created to advance cross-industry blockchain technologies. It is a global collaboration including leaders in advertising, banking, Internet of Things, supply chains, manufacturing and technology. The Linux Foundation hosts Hyperledger under the foundation.
The AdLedger Consortium is a non-profit foundation governed by its members. The consortium will be run by volunteer contributions made to the foundation in the form of expertise, technical resources and technology infrastructure. The mission of AdLedger is to support an ecosystem where advertisers and publishers can regain control of their data assets, improve ad targeting capabilities and keep more of their margins currently lost to the rising costs associated with distrust and layers of intermediaries.
“It is great to have Ternio join AdLedger,” said Christiana Cacciapuoti, executive director at AdLedger. “By increasing efficiencies and enabling a more transparent advertising supply chain, blockchain can potentially reduce cost and fraud for publishers and buyers. AdLedger is looking forward to Ternio’s contributions in the collaborative effort to bring greater transparency to digital media.”


