SAE International Unveils New Free Trial Experience, Alert And Notification System For SAE MOBILUS® Platform

11 Jun 2018

SAE International is excited to introduce an enhanced free trial experience for the SAE MOBILUS® technical resource platform, as well as an all-new Alert and Notification system
SAE International is excited to introduce an enhanced free trial experience for the SAE MOBILUS® technical resource platform, as well as an all-new Alert and Notification system. The leading resource discovery and management tool of the mobility engineering industry, the SAE MOBILUS platform serves over 40,000 international users and is designed to increase efficiency, productivity, and innovation among engineering academics and professionals. Both the free trial and alert and notification system are designed to augment platform user experience for both current and prospective SAE MOBILUS customers.
Read More: Do You Have A Response Plan In Case Of A Data Breach Under GDPR?
The enhanced SAE MOBILUS free trial allows users to explore the features and benefits of the technical resource platform for 30 days. A sample selection of SAE’s 226,000+ high-value resources will be accessible, such as:
Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles (Standard)
Design and Development of Autonomous Amphibious Unmanned Aerial Vehicle and UAV Mountable Water Sampling Devices for Water Based Applications (Technical Paper)
Uncertainty Analysis of Inertial Instruments for its Integration with Satellite Navigation (Technical Paper)
Speedometer Test Procedure (Standard)
Read More: Interview With Jeff Gallino, Founder And CTO, CallMiner
In addition to the select resource downloads, the free trial also includes access to the platform’s intuitive, customer-centric interface. Users can demo features such as personal document annotation, a customizable dashboard, downloadable datasets, and dynamic redlining, which displays the changes between resource revisions and versions. Once the 30-day trial is complete, users will have the option to purchase a full subscription or choose from customizable packages.
The new SAE MOBILUS Alert and Notification system marks the first phase of an initiative to deliver a more customized platform experience. Users now have the ability to adjust the frequency of the alerts they set for saved searches and standard revisions to daily, weekly, or monthly. The notifications are sent via email and within the SAE MOBILUS platform by utilizing the Dashboard. All standards that users had currently marked as “Favorites” and received notifications for have been automatically migrated to the new alert system. The SAE MOBILUS User Guide has also been updated with information regarding the new Alert and Notification functionality. Alert options for additional publication types, events and committees will continue to be rolled out in 2018 and into the future.
Read More: GRIMM Launches Michigan Cybersecurity Research Lab For Automobility And Aerospace Industries


