Tompkins Robotics’ T-Sort: Revolutionizing Unit And Parcel Sortation

05 Feb 2018

This new and innovative robotic technology will help build world-class supply chains, providing unmatched flexibility and throughput.
Tompkins Robotics, a division of Tompkins International, has just released a new video sharing the innovation behind t-Sort. Watch this video as it explains Tompkins Robotics and the benefits it provides. Tompkins Robotics has partnered with Lab Z to bring the world’s first portable, automated sortation system, t-Sort, already patented in North America and Europe. This new and innovative robotic technology will help build world-class supply chains, providing unmatched flexibility and throughput. The design can accomplish volumes ranging from millions of units a day, to a small operation in the backroom of a supercenter or mall anchor store.
The t-Sort system performs much like a tilt tray or crossbelt sorter. However, the unique and exciting difference is that it uses completely independent robots. This is the equivalent of having a tilt tray with no track allowing each robot to travel to any divert or induction station independently along the shortest path. This greatly enhances efficiency to maximize your operational capabilities. Robots, chutes, and induction stations can be added modularly at any time with no interruption or downtime; an additional robot can be added in seconds. A unique feature is the system is purchased on a seasonal or annual basis, deferring the capital investment and fully utilizing the asset at all times, unlike a traditional sorter that one buys for their long-term growth plan. Compared to a traditional tilt tray system, the capital required is 50% to 70% less. The system has lower risks due to the fact all elements are plug and play, and there is complete redundancy in all elements to include software, servers, and power. A typical installation takes only three to four months and the required space is reduced tremendously.
The standard system operates on two levels and allows sortation of a wide variety of goods. Individual items range from extremely small cosmetics to gallon containers of liquids. The system is ideally suited to handle apparel, footwear, general merchandise, single items, and innerpacks. Parcels sorted include bags, boxes, and mailers. Overall the system handles loads up to a 30 x 36 inch footprint. Unit sortation and parcel sortation can take place simultaneously and flex as needed on demand. Given the unique advantages of this application multiple, large scale national customers are scheduled for implementation in 2018.
In conclusion, lower and delayed investment, shorter lead times, faster implementation, reduced space and labor, all drive greater economic justification and ROI. In addition, the system has unheard of flexibility compared to the systems in use today and is truly a game changer. Tompkins Robotics will help further evolve supply chain logistics automation, improving the efficiency of logistics operations. t-Sort allows for better planning, implementation, controls efficiency, flow of goods, customer service, and allows a far wider range of companies to afford and justify automation.
To better understand the Tompkins Robotics’ benefits come visit the newly innovated and updated Tompkins Emerging Technology Center. See live demonstrations of the latest in robotics, The Connected Warehouse™, and more. The event will take place on Tuesday, February 20th and Wednesday, February 21st in Orlando, FL. Come either day to learn about the latest technology available to enhance, build, and complete an advanced, smart, and efficient supply chain.


