C2RO And Qihan Announce Partnership To Bring AI And Enterprise Data Analytics To The Sanbot Elf

05 Mar 2018

C2RO’s Cloud Based Artificial Intelligence significantly enhances Sanbot Elf for business applications that require high precision identity verification such as loyalty programs, customer service, and security applications.
C2RO today announced a partnership with the leading service robot manufacturer in China, Qihan Sanbot Robotics, to bring powerful cloud based cognitive augmentation to the Sanbot Elf. The already successful Elf platform will initially be enhanced with C2RO Engage, a software only solution for enterprise grade face recognition, which is highly accurate, fast, allows for ‘on-the-fly’ learning of tens of thousands of faces, and most importantly enables instant knowledge sharing and collaboration between connected robots through the cloud.
“This integration is a significant milestone for the service robot industry,” said Ryan Wu, Director of Sales at Qihan. “We’re excited that Sanbot customers can now use the Elf platform for new and valuable applications that depend on real-time enterprise class face recognition. We’re already signing up new partners that wish to take advantage of this software capability.”
C2RO’s centralized real-time data processing and control architecture allows any connected robot to leverage the entire database of known faces, enabling critical business applications which require robots to share knowledge across multiple sites and geographies. Moreover, the platform provides a user friendly dashboard for monitoring connected robots, visual statistics about the application, and an end to-end software solution that can tie-in robots and edge devices to existing business software systems. This allows businesses to better understand client behavior and preferences which can be leveraged to deliver specialized and increasingly valuable services.
Riccardo Badalone
“We’re extremely excited about the partnership with Qihan. Customers can continue to leverage the reliability and quality of Qihan’s robots while having a simple software upgrade for increasing the robot’s perception and interactive potential,” said Riccardo Badalone, CEO of C2RO. “This new cognitive capability, combined with advanced data analysis tools, is creating new opportunities for service robots across industries such as hotels, airports, healthcare, retail, restaurants, offices, and more.”
The service robot industry has been making waves recently as manufacturers formed a prominent presence at CES earlier this month in Las Vegas. Potential users raise the question of how these robots will begin to create social benefit and increase business value. Qihan and C2RO are answering that question by offering an integrated end-to-end robotics platform that will allow businesses to deliver highly relevant and customized services to their clientele in real-time.


