Suometry Announces Isadore Katz As CEO

30 Jan 2018

Isadore Has Worked For Over 35 Years in Software and IT, Both As An Entrepreneur And Senior Executive
Montreal-based computer vision start-up Suometry announced that Isadore Katz has joined as CEO. Most recently, he was the CEO of CLK Design Automation (sold to Ansys in 2017). From 2009 to 2013, Isadore was Senior Advisor to the Under Secretary for Benefits at the Department of Veterans Affairs, where he led the development of the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) and was instrumental in helping the Department transition to a paperless claims process. He was CEO of Chrysalis Symbolic Design (sold to Avant! in 1999) and Lightchip (sold to Digital Lightwave in 2003).
Isadore Katz
“I am excited to be joining Suometry,” says Katz, CEO. “Suometry’s technology and platform has the potential to be genuinely transformative in everything from virtual reality to ADAS.” As well as bringing extensive management experience, Isadore will be focused on targeting visionary applications for Suometry’s technology and IP.
“I am delighted to welcome Isadore, an accomplished business leader, as CEO,” states co-founder Phuc-Tue Le Dinh, “His extensive executive experience and vision will only better serve our company as we continue to extend the reach of our core IP’s magic, as well as contribute further dry-humor to our growing company culture.”
“A warm welcome to Isadore! I am thrilled to have someone with Iz’s executive experience, poise and technology background joining our young team and charting the next phase of our growth,” remarked co-founder Gina Zhou.
Suometry is a Montreal-based computer vision technology startup focused on developing the fastest stereoscopic 3D 360° camera on the market today, boasting millisecond latency. Working with OEM’s as well as technology partners and university R&D programs, Suometry have developed their own internal innovative camera calibration methods, video processing algorithms and a proprietary live-stitching software. Currently incubated as part of TandemLaunch, a deep technology accelerator program, Suometry continue to make advancement in applications ranging from virtual reality live streaming to next generation machine learning systems.


