Avidbots Signs Distributor Agreement With Macnica Inc To Help Labour Shortage In Japan

17 Feb 2018

Neo Floor Cleaning Robot Will Provide Efficient Autonomous Cleaning Service
Avidbots Corp. today announced that they have signed a distribution agreement with Macnica Inc., a supplier of specialty technology products in Japan and worldwide. Macnica will distribute the Neo self-driving floor scrubber across Japan to customers challenged by the largest labour shortage in the country in over 40 years.  An aging and declining population has left Japanese companies desperate for workers, especially in facilities management and cleaning roles, sending labour costs skyrocketing. Macnica can now offer an autonomous floor cleaning robot that reduces labour requirements and costs while providing a higher quality and consistent cleaning service.
The Avidbots Neo is a purpose-built floor scrubbing robot that integrates state of the art navigation technology with hardware that is designed for ease of use, longevity, serviceability, safety and high productivity.
“We have customers that simply can’t find enough staff to clean their facilities, or they are losing cleaners due to retirement,” says Tomokazu Kanazawa, Director, New Business Development for Macnica Inc. “The Avidbots Neo will allow us to offer a service that reduces the need for human resources while delivering superior cleaning, which can be tracked through detailed reports.”
Neo enables both in-house cleaning teams and building service contractors to offer an innovative technology-driven approach to cleaning that cuts costs, enhances service, and differentiates them from competition. Neo is supported by an easy-to-use web portal that provides real-time and historical reporting, providing greater visibility into operations for cleaning teams. Macnica will provide installation, support and maintenance services for Neo to customers in a variety of target industries including airports, shopping malls, logistics industries, factories, and offices.
Faizan Sheikh
“Japan is one of the most tech-forward nations on the planet and is also suffering from a significant labor shortage.  We are extremely excited to partner with Macnica as it allows us to further actualize our vision of bringing robots to everyday life and expanding human potential,” says Faizan Sheikh, CEO of Avidbots.
The Avidbots Neo is currently deployed on 4 continents, servicing some of the world’s leading shopping malls, airports, education facilities, healthcare centers, manufacturing sites, and other commercial spaces.
Since its establishment in 1972, Macnica Inc. has specialized in the supply of wide a variety of high-value-added electronic parts and network equipment, particularly semiconductors, to the electronics, information and communications industries. The company is justly known as a leader in the high-technology fields in which they operate. In recent years, Macnica has expanded its lineup to provide in-depth technical support to customers in addition to the supply of electronic components and information systems.
Avidbots Corp. vision is to bring robots to everyday life to expand human potential. Its first product is the NEO self-driving floor scrubber, which is widely deployed and trusted by the world’s leading facilities and building service contractors.


