Penske Logistics Gains Membership In Blockchain In Transport Alliance (BiTA)

13 Jan 2018

Penske Logistics has gained entry into the Blockchain in Transport Alliance (BiTA) as a corporate member.
Andy Moses
“We’ve joined BiTA to take part in better understanding the benefits of blockchain for our customers and to be a part of crafting the standard framework in the development and implementation of blockchain technology,” stated Andy Moses, Penske Logistics senior vice president of global products.
BiTA is a new organization formed less than a year ago and it provides a forum to promote and educate, while encouraging the development of blockchain applications, within the transportation industry.
Penske Logistics sees potential blockchain benefits for its customers operating in the manufacturing, food, beverage sectors as well as other industries.
Benefits may be achieved by further digitizing and securing supply chain and logistics processes, improving order accuracy, as well as tracking physical assets like vehicles, trailers, trucks, or containers and securing freight bill pay and audit transactions across Penske’s extensive freight brokerage and dedicated carriage operations.
According to the recent 2018 Third-Party Logistics Study, 30 percent of 3PLs and 16 percent of shippers surveyed see blockchain as a potential application, yet most have yet to engage with the technology. The study also describes anticipated benefits including improved supply chain visibility and potential challenges that participants will face in implementing blockchain. The study is accessible at no cost by visiting www.3PLStudy.com.
Penske Logistics is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Penske Truck Leasing. With operations in North America, South America, Europe and Asia, Penske Logistics provides supply chain management and logistics services to leading companies around the world. Penske Logistics delivers value through its design, planning and execution in transportation, warehousing and freight management. To learn more visit www.penskelogistics.com.


