Concept3D Collaborates With Flexential To Introduce VR-Enabled Virtual Data Center Tour

28 Feb 2018

System Offers Unique VR Experience for Sales and Marketing
Concept3D, a leader in creating immersive online experiences with 3D modeling, virtual reality (VR), interactive maps and virtual tour software, today announced the launch of a powerful 3D video and VR experience of Flexential’s (formerly Peak 10 + ViaWest) data centers, including a unique immersive section to learn about data centers through a game-like interface.
Exterior of Flexential Data Center – The first stop on the VR-enabled virtual tour built and powered by Concept3D (PRNewsfoto/Concept3D)
The system was first unveiled at Gartner’s 2017 IT Infrastructure, Operations Management & Data Center Conference in Las Vegas, where conference attendees lined up at the booth to put on the Oculus VR goggles and be transported to one of Flexential’s data centers, where they could tour the space as if they were there.
“When our team first saw the 3D video and experienced the tour developed by Concept3D, we were impressed,” said Jeff Gaillard, chief marketing officer at Flexential. “Our data centers are among our greatest assets, and essentially bringing those to the show with us and giving people a virtual on-site experience created a lot of excitement.”
Powered by Concept3D’s virtual tour software, the VR tour can easily be repurposed for future tradeshows and as a sales and marketing tool that can be sent out to anyone as a link, as well as posted on websites and sent with goggles in a direct mail campaign, among many other uses.
“Seeing the level of excitement from the Flexential team and visitors as they experienced the data center tour really demonstrated what VR and immersive media have to offer,” said Robert Johnson, Concept3D Vice President of Business Development. “Visitors were asking questions and engaging with the Flexential sales and marketing team – the main goal of any tradeshow. There’s so much potential here to take people on a journey and give them an on-the-ground look into how your company operates and what gives it a competitive advantage.”
Flexential helps organizations optimize their journey of IT transformation while simultaneously balancing cost, scalability, compliance and security. The company is committed to building trusted relationships and delivering tailored solutions that suit the individual needs of its customers. Utilizing its people, values and reliable performance, Flexential is deeply invested in the success of its 4,200+ customers, who trust it to deliver core data center solutions of colocation and connectivity, as well as cloud, managed solutions and professional services. Flexential’s robust suite of assets span 21 domestic and international markets and comprises 41 highly redundant and connectivity-rich data centers.
Founded in 2006, Concept3D is a leader in creating immersive online experiences with 3D modeling, interactive maps and VR-enabled virtual tour software. Concept3D software brings any physical location into an intuitive and navigable digital format, providing clients with a powerful competitive edge through applications like data visualization, wayfinding, and immersive VR-enabled virtual tours. Concept3D clients include convention centers and event spaces, data centers, healthcare and retirement facilities, large commercial sites, resorts, hotels and theme parks, as well as universities and many other locations.


