Alexa, Start Mowing! Husqvarna Launches “Just Ask Alexa!” For Robotic Mowers

20 Mar 2018

With The Integration, Homeowners With Husqvarna Automower Will Be Able To Start, Stop, Park And Get Status-Updates From Their Mower By Asking Alexa
Today, at a press event in Aycliffe, United Kingdom, Husqvarna demonstrated the functions of “Just ask Alexa” and future Amazon Alexa features for Husqvarna robotic mowers. The first version will be available September 1 in all Automower® Connect equipped robotic mowers from Husqvarna, including the many thousands of connected Husqvarna robotic mowers already in gardens and parks across the world today.
This first version will be able to take care of the most commonly used commands such as start, stop and park, hence providing an additional way of integrating with the robotic mower, besides the existing mobile applications.
“We are the pioneer, innovation and market leader in the field of robotic lawn mowing: now we made our Husqvarna Automower Alexa compatible, as cloud-based voice services are growing fast,” says Sascha Menges, President of the Husqvarna Division. “Our customers rightly expect Husqvarna products to be in the forefront, giving them multiple and ever more convenient ways of interacting with the product.”
Husqvarna Automower is the world leading robotic lawnmower since 1995, mowing public and residential lawns around the world, and known for its quiet and reliable handling of complex lawns. Husqvarna Automower® is one of the few robotic mowers on the market that can easily handle steep slopes, automatically return to its charging station, as well as be controlled from anywhere in the world with connectivity.
Husqvarna Professional Products Inc. is a subsidiary of the Husqvarna Group. Husqvarna Group is a world-leading producer of outdoor power products for garden, park and forest care. Products include chainsaws, trimmers, robotic lawn mowers and ride-on lawn mowers. The Group is also the European leader in garden watering products and a world leader in cutting equipment and diamond tools for the construction and stone industries. The Group’s products and solutions are sold under brands including Husqvarna, Gardena, McCulloch, Poulan Pro, Weed Eater, Flymo, Zenoah and Diamant Boart via dealers and retailers to consumers and professionals in more than 100 countries. Net sales in 2017 amounted to SEK 39 billion and the Group has more than 13,000 employees in 40 countries.


