G2 Tech Group Announces Exhibition And Sponsorship At AWS Summit New York

10 Jul 2018

One of the Northeast’s most trusted Advanced Consulting Partner in the Amazon Web Services Partner Network – newly combined with Reliam and Stratalux – will also host attendees at Barcade NYC following the conference
G2 Tech Group, the Boston-based Advanced Consulting Partner in the Amazon Web Services (AWS) Partner Network (APN), today announced its sponsorship and participation at AWS Summit New York. The company will meet with attendees at booth #236 for the first time since merging with fellow APN Consulting and Managed Service Provider (MSP) Partners Reliam and Stratalux – a deal that instantly expands G2 Tech Group’s AWS management capabilities and expertise. G2 Tech Group is also a sponsor of the event, taking place July 16-17 in New York City. AWS Summit New York is designed to educate organizations new to AWS about the AWS Cloud and to offer existing customers deep technical content to be more successful with AWS.
G2 Tech Group recently completed a merger with L.A.-based APN Consulting and Managed Service Provider Partners Reliam and Stratalux. Doing so forms a unified organization with an expanded coast-to-coast presence and even stronger proficiencies optimizing customers’ AWS deployments. More specifically, G2 Tech Group has achieved AWS Competency status in key areas, including DevOps, Healthcare, and Life Sciences. G2 Tech Group is now joined by Reliam and Stratalux’s industry expertise working with customers in media and entertainment, mobile gaming, digital media, marketing, e-commerce, and Software-as-a-Service.
Read More: AI Breakthrough Announces Inaugural Award Winners
G2 Tech Group’s services now features more than 90 AWS certifications and has the integrated resources to meet customer needs for AWS strategy consulting, migrations, architecture, solution design, security and governance, cost optimization, DevOps implementation, application performance management, and 24/7 managed services and support for an extensive breadth of AWS workloads. This expanded skillset, combined with G2’s already close and supportive relationship with the Northeast’s AWS and DevOps communities, further establishes G2 Tech Group as an APN Consulting Partner in the region.
Read More: Insurtech: the new AI disruption is hitting insurance
Glenn Grant
Following AWS Summit New York, G2 Tech Group is hosting an after-hours event at Barcade for any and all AWS representatives, customers, and other attendees to relax and enjoy drinks, food, and games. The fun begins at 9pm ET.
“This is G2’s first public event since combining forces with Reliam and Stratalux, and we couldn’t be more excited to get out there and meet face-to-face with cloud-centric organizations and AWS personnel,” said Glenn Grant, founder of G2 Tech Group and now President, U.S. East, of the combined company. “AWS Summits are always information-packed events full of actionable best practices, and we’re proud to be involved – and be sure to come by our Barcade event to unwind after the conference wraps up!”
Read More: Interview with Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder and CEO, Bespoke Inc


