TIBCO Acquires Data Virtualization Business From Cisco

30 Oct 2017

Analytics Users to Benefit from Improved Data Agility, Enhanced Scalability, and Better Business Insights
TIBCO Software Inc., a global leader in integration, API management, and analytics, announced it has entered into an agreement to acquire Cisco’s Data Virtualization business (formerly Composite Software), specifically Cisco Information Server, a market-leading solution that powers enterprise-scale data virtualization, and associated consulting and support services. This strategic move strengthens TIBCO’s portfolio of analytics products, allowing businesses to get analytic solutions into production faster than alternatives while continuing to adapt as data sources change from traditional databases and big data sources to cloud and IoT. The transaction remains subject to customary conditions and is expected to close in the coming weeks.
Data Virtualization helps knowledge workers to quickly discover and access their own views of corporate data in an automated, intelligent way. The Cisco technology can access a large, diverse, and complex set of enterprise data stores and create a “virtual” data layer for analytics without disturbing the source data. All this is done without extracting data via ETL in a separate data warehouse.
“Data Virtualization helps our customers find and analyze the data they need in hours or days, rather than months, so that they can quickly discover insights and take insight-driven action,” said Mark Palmer, senior vice president of analytics, TIBCO. “The next generation of business intelligence depends on doing more with analytics than just putting data on a graph. Data Virtualization is a key component of getting the right data at the right time to business analysts, data scientists, and automated applications using streaming analytics.”
The addition of the Data Virtualization business will enable TIBCO analytics users, including TIBCO Spotfire® customers, to improve data agility for faster responses to ever-changing analytics and business intelligence needs, reduce data complexity for enhanced scalability, and drive better business insights. Spotfire® is a smart, secure, enterprise-class analytics platform with built-in data wrangling that delivers AI-driven, visual, and streaming analytics. The Spotfire product line includes seamless enhancement of Cisco’s Data Virtualization into TIBCO’s broader Connected Intelligence platform, while also delivering enhanced end-to-end data discovery and governance.


