Mensia Technologies Raises 1.3 Million Euro To Introduce Koala Neurofeedback In Europe

23 Jun 2018

MENSIA KOALA Is A Medical Device Disguised As A Therapeutic Video Game On An Interactive Tablet Connected To The Brain Activity; It Treats ADHD, Attention Deficit Disorders With Or Without Hyperactivity, Children, And Adolescents  
Mensia Technologies, French MedTech startup, leads the new booming category of Digital therapeutics with its revolutionary « at home « neurofeedback, to train the brain and cure neuropsy disorders without drugs.
Co-founder INRIA-IT2, existing shareholders and now HARA, which are business angels experts in medical device category, joined this fundraising. BPI de Rennes is also part of this tour.
Mensia Technologies was born out of INRIA in 2012. The IT expert labs in Rennes are computing real-time signaling softwares. The neurofeedback technique is non-invasive, at home and without drugs. MENSIA KOALA treats ADHD, Attention Deficit Disorders with or without Hyperactivity, children and adolescents. This unique medical device is a therapeutic video game on an interactive tablet connected to the brain activity.
Children learn to control their attention by exercising 3 times a week during 4 months of treatment. Visual feedback given during the game, allows the children to learn, control and create automatisms. Six years of R&D with 12 $ Millions invested, including the last largest clinical multicentric trial never ever made, NEWROFEED-Koala, successfuly led to the grant of a CE mark class IIa in Europe. Sales kickstart in March for France.
Read More: Google And AI Predictions: When Am I Dying?
37 health points of care from French national partner HOMEPERF, delivers family training for home use of Koala. The device is prescribed and ordered directly on the website. Family received their Mensia Koala at home: all items ready to use for 4-month treatment, with webportal supervision. Children benefit from significant reduction of their attention deficit and or hyperactivity with long-lasting effects. Benefit/Risk ratio is extremely favorable and no adverse event compared to the amphetamines drugs (Ritaline).
Michel du Peloux
Michel du Peloux, CEO of Mensia Technologies: « We are proud to deliver the first worldwide digital therapeutic device to treat ADHD with a Class IIa registration for medical scripts and follow up all over Europe. Far from neurogaming, we have 5 patents, randomized clinical trials and state of the art expertise in brain-computer interface. Our pipeline of « at home neurofeedback » is promising: resistant chronic low back pain despite opiods, is our next medical device. Mensia Technologies initiates now the next tour for a series A of 20 M$ aiming to the USA deployment.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu


