Bitcoin.com Hits Major Milestone: 2.5 Million Bitcoin Wallets Created By Users

12 Jul 2018

The Bitcoin.com wallet is striving to be the most useful place to store Bitcoin Cash for day to day payments.
Bitcoin.com has reached a remarkable feat. In less than 12 months since the BCH & BTC compatible Bitcoin.com wallet launched, more than 2.5 million wallets have been created. The website, where the wallet is available for download, is the premier source for everything Bitcoin-related. Users are able to buy Bitcoin Cash (BCH) and Bitcoin Core (BTC), as well as access other services like Cloud mining and games.
Bitcoin.com
Bitcoin and the blockchain are rapidly disrupting global commerce, impacting everything from peer to peer payments to large retail giants.
The Bitcoin.com wallet is easy to use and quicker to set up than it is even to download. Users can pay for goods and services with the wallet instantly.
Follow Us
“We are pleased that 2.5 million wallets have been created. It shows just how many people find our wallet useful and proves that it’s the best place to use and store their Bitcoin Cash. People trust us,” says Alfonso Rocha, wallet product manager at Bitcoin.com. “We are also continuously working every day to make sure we have the best wallet out there. The quality of what we produce is as important to us as it is to our customers.”
To meet this promise, a highly-skilled team of developers, based at the Bitcoin.com Tokyo, Japan office and in sites around the globe, built the simple and secure Bitcoin.com wallet. Even after its launch, they work diligently to ensure the wallet app is running at full capacity and is updated at least twice a month. Each updated release of the app has a new and exciting feature added for users to enjoy.
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
More than just a basic cryptocurrency wallet, Bitcoin.com’s wallet connects people. Users can read the latest newsor engage with the community on the Bitcoin.com forum. Bitcoin.com also provides helpful tools and real-time market price and chart information as well as Bitcoin mining and Bitcoin events information. The app helps the Bitcoin community understand and learn about the industry. It also enables them to use BCH as cash on a day to day basis.
Those interested can use the Bitcoin cash faucet to receive a small amount of FREE Bitcoin cash. Visit Free.Bitcoin.comon desktop or mobile to get started. For more information on the wallet, visit Wallet.Bitcoin.com or connect with Bitcoin.com.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections


