Ogury’s Machine Learning Algorithm Lituus Offers Next Level Audience Targeting

24 Jan 2018

Ford, One Of The World’s Leading Automotive Brands And A Beta Tester Of This New Solution, Has Already Achieved Outstanding Results For Its New Ford Fiesta Pre-Launch Campaign
Ogury, the mobile data platform that provides the most comprehensive view of mobile user behavior globally, is enhancing its targeting capabilities with the launch of a cutting-edge solution for brands and marketeers. This new solution combines human intelligence and machine learning in the planning and implementation of mobile advertising campaigns, delivering audience targeting of unparalleled accuracy at scale.
Its works in three interconnected steps: learn, optimise, share.
Learn: It starts by learning criteria at the start of a client’s campaign – such as the brand website data – to learn from users’ qualified traffic. Ogury’s proprietary algorithm, called Lituus comes into play by learning from the qualified traffic of the chosen websites and identifying both the discriminant and similar attributes amongst users. After studying this, Lituus, builds a targeting matrix composed of hundreds of different criteria.
Optimise during the campaign: Lituus inputs and learns continuously throughout the duration of the campaign to constantly exclude the lower performing criteria and upweight impressions from the higher performing criteria. It also takes into account conditions such as optimal time of day, publishers, device models, connectivity, and localisation. This is all achieved using Ogury’s device level first-party behavioral data, which provides insight into users’ apps installed, apps usage and mobile web browsing. This level of mobile insight is unique in depth, recency and accuracy, and not available through any other network or data platform.
Share the findings with clients: At the end of the campaign, a ‘targeting performance’ section is included within the campaign report, offering a comprehensive view of the best and worst performing combinations of targeting criteria, websites visited, apps owned and apps used by the audience of the campaigns. This provides the customer with a transparent data set
that is based on actual learnings from the campaign, as opposed to the ‘black box’ data collection approach that is currently widely used in the industry. These learnings can then be applied to the next campaign and for strategic audience planning.
Christophe Thibault
Commenting on the effectiveness of this new solution, Christophe Thibault, Chief Algorithm Officer, Ogury said: “Ogury’s new targeting solution offers higher performance at a bigger scale and with increased transparency. Its highly automated process also means minimal human input, which not only saves time during the campaign setup phase but also allows better targeting. In the first applications of this new machine learning approach we have observed up to 50% drops in user bounce rate in cost per click campaigns, and up to 16% increases in video completion rates in cost per view campaigns over human targeting alone.”
Ford, one of the world’s leading automotive brands and a beta tester of Ogury’s new mobile targeting solution, has already achieved outstanding results for a pre-launch campaign promoting the new Ford Fiesta in France, using the new machine learning based solution.
Commenting on the success of the mobile advertising campaign, Céline Armitage, Communications Director, Ford France, said: “Along with delivering excellent results, Ogury has equipped us with a list of very useful criteria showing what performed best for future targeting. We have already reused this for the main launch campaign of the Fiesta and it has allowed us to optimise results from the start. In comparison to the bounce rate on the Fiesta redirection page at the start of the relaunch campaign, we have achieved a decrease in bounce rate of 13 points.”


