Mullenlowe Group Asia Pacific Establishes Data Science And Analytics Centre Of Excellence

28 Mar 2018

Jonathan Hart and Chris Rogers Appointed To Lead Centre Of Excellence To Consolidate And Enhance Experience-Led Digital Transformation Capabilities Across Asia Pacific
MullenLowe Group Asia Pacific today announces the formation of their Data Science & Analytics Centre of Excellence, supported by the appointment of Jonathan Hart as Head of Data Science & Analytics, and Chris Rogers as Senior Data Scientist.
From its base in Tokyo, the Centre of Excellence will lead the consolidation of MullenLowe Group’s analytical resources across Asia Pacific, following an increasing demand for more sophisticated data-driven solutions that create business value for brands.
The Centre of Excellence will function alongside MullenLowe Group’s existing Customer Experience (CX), and Development Centres of Excellence in Sydney and Chengdu respectively, together delivering unrivalled digital transformation solutions. In addition, it will form an integral part of MullenLowe Group’s brand communications and media offering across Asia Pacific, to drive superior marketing and brand communications performance for clients.
Both senior appointments bring skills and expertise from outside of the advertising industry that address the most pressing challenges for modern brands. Their approach leverages a new class of analytical capabilities designed to intelligently predict and enhance consumer interactions by designing online experiences which generate valuable, insight-rich data.
Jonathan Hart will lead MullenLowe Group’s data science and analytical offerings for clients across APAC. Most recently, Hart was Vice President of Decision Sciences at GSD&M in North America, and prior to this held leadership roles at Accenture Analytics.
“By taking a comprehensive approach to creating and curating customer data across the entire customer journey, we engineer a tremendous competitive advantage for our clients, and enhance all of our core delivery capabilities at the same time” said Hart. “It’s this unique approach and challenger mind-set that drew me to MullenLowe Group,” he added.
With a background in cognitive science, Chris Rogers brings extensive experience in delivering analytical product solutions for clients, having spent over five years at Boeing Vancouver Labs in Canada where he delivered productized data science solutions and operational analytics across various sectors.
James Hollow
James Hollow, CEO, MullenLowe Group Japan commented on the wider impact the Centre of Excellence will have on APAC. “We believe in a hybrid between scientific and creative cultures, where data is the catalyst for empowering human insight and creativity. This new way of understanding the consumer enhances and empowers each of the existing offerings in MullenLowe Group and does it in a way that fits with our challenger spirit, further enabling us to deliver an oversized impact for our clients” he said.


