GreenBox POS Blockchain Payment And E-Wallet Technology Now Available For IOS And Android

18 Jun 2018

The Company’s Flagship Product, Taking Full Advantage Of Blockchain Benefits Like Security, Privacy, Reliability And Extendibility
GreenBox POS, LLC the (“Company”), is pleased to announce that QuickCard, the company’s latest Blockchain payment and E-Wallet technology development has now passed all deployment criteria, including release criteria and compliance requirements. This robust, world-class technology, is now available for most platforms, and will gradually replace existing installations of GreenBox payment technology and be the only available payment infrastructure for new clients moving forward.
The company’s flagship product, taking full advantage of Blockchain benefits like security, privacy, reliability and extendibility, is also the first system to offer instant settlement capabilities and an end-to-end, natively-integrated product suite. GreenBox existing and new clients have lined up to be among the first to adopt the new technology, and full-scale installations are now ongoing. The company already sees a dramatic improvement to earning quality and predictability, and expects this trend to persist. GreenBox’s success in securing robust commitments pipeline to deploy the new technology created opportunities in several new business verticals for the company. As a result, updated gross revenues projections reflecting that for the next 18 months have more than doubled.
Read More: Cognizant’s Netcentric Named 2018 Adobe Experience Cloud Partner Of The Year In EMEA
GreenBox POS (“GRBX”) is a hardware and software technology company that builds customized payment solutions to different industries. GRBX is based in California with offices in Seattle, WA; Las Vegas, NV; Vancouver, BC, Canada; and HQ in San Diego, CA.
The company develops individual disruptive applications integrated in an end-to-end suite of financial products, supporting multiple industries and with an emphasis on Blockchain secured ledger technology. The company was awarded 5 provisional patents for its technology. GreenBox POS develops the following main products: POS (Point of Sale software and hardware solutions); DEL (delivery app, APIs to POS and PAY); PAY (payment app, providing financial APIs to all other components); KIOSK (deposit, cash and E-wallet management). All products, services and custom hardware are available now from GRBX


