Cryptanite Partners With Codius On Blockchain Hosting Capability

25 Jun 2018

Cryptanite Blockchain Technologies Corp. (CSE: NITE), a Boulder-based blockchain technology company, today announced the launch of hosting capabilities with Codius, an open-source platform that enables the hosting of smart contracts and apps powered by the Ripple blockchain. Publicly listed in both Canada and in Germany, Cryptanite is one of the first companies to market with Codius’ hosting capabilities.
Follow Us
Henry Duong
“Cryptanite is currently one of the only public companies that is committed to offering Codius hosting services,” said Henry Duong, Cryptanite’s CTO. “Our goal is to support the development of the blockchain ecosystem, and  to provide reliable Codius hosting that makes it easier than ever for individuals and companies to benefit from blockchain technology.”
Read More: Mensia Technologies Raises 1.3 Million Euro To Introduce Koala Neurofeedback In Europe
Stefan Thomas
Stefan Thomas, the CTO of Ripple and creator of the InterLedger Protocol, has formed Coil and released Codius as open-source software that anyone can utilize.
Cryptanite’s announcement empowers people who want to experiment and create smart contracts for professional use, and which cannot currently be hosted on cloud computing platforms. Cryptanite aims to ensure anyone interested in smart contracts with the Ripple platform has a stable, trusted source for hosting their projects. And just like hosting a website or application, the ability to trust that the site or app won’t go down is vital.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
Much the same way cloud computing made web hosting more accessible, Codius makes experimentation on the blockchain more widely available because people won’t need to build from scratch. The hosting service allows users who want to experiment and create smart contracts for personal or professional use to upload and host their smart contract projects of any size on Cryptanite’s node at www.codiuscloud.com
The company’s Cryptanite Wallet app is designed to provide a secure, easy-to-use and frictionless process to buy, invest and store a diversified collection of more than 15 top cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, Stellar and Dash. The app is now available on Apple’s App Store and on Google Play.
Read More: Think Next: Microsoft For Startups China Enables Chinese Innovations To “Go Global” And Overseas Innovations To “Go China”


