Lattice Enhances Data Capabilities For AI-based Segmentation Engine

31 Oct 2017

Improves Omni-Channel Campaign Performance by 3x
Lattice Engines, a leading provider of revenue acceleration solutions,  announced a significant new version of its AI-based segmentation platform that has enhanced data and operationalization capabilities. Lattice’s predictive platform now has 3000+ intent surge intensity ratings that predicts how far into the buying cycle your prospects are, and ability to create hyper-targeted digital audiences on 200+ ad-serving platform, including Facebook, to reach those prospects.
“Effective programs require an omnichannel approach where teams engage buyers with a consistent message across all offline and online channels,” said Chitrang Shah, VP of Product at Lattice Engines. “Buyers today are inundated with irrelevant messages from brands, in fact 96% of marketers say their ads are reaching the wrong people. Our new release enables teams to run hyper-targeted campaigns that reach buyers with the right profile who are already searching for a solution, improving the ROI of their spend.”
The latest release of the Lattice platform is simplifying the intent data available to marketing and sales for their campaigns, which improves the way campaigns are created and executed. Some of the enhancements include:
Create hyper-targeted segments
Buyer actions – Track buyer activities across thousands of websites to determine the level of buyer interest or intent
Business momentum detection – track revenue and sales trends that assess whether or not a business is growing
Spend capacity – determine the amount of money budgeted by a company for capital and operating expenses based on past purchases
Ad targeting – Lattice now offers 21,000 attributes that help companies target individuals via personalized ads
The Lattice platform aggregates, standardizes and normalizes data from your internal systems and makes that available for segmentation alongside the external data factors provided, such as intent
Operationalize across multiple channels
Launch multi-step marketing campaigns that envelop the target segment with the same message via multiple channels
Create tailored sales plays to be run against key segments
Curate specific talking points for reps to use with target audiences
Create audiences and launch targeted ads on any of 200+ different ad platforms
“After deploying Lattice we gained a complete view of our target accounts, and we’re now able to create specific messaging that speaks to the pain points we can help solve for companies, or ways we integrate well into their established tech stack,” said Malachi Threadgill, Director of Demand Generation at Masergy. “We run multichannel campaigns to engage with these target accounts using Lattice to identify who to target and what to say.  We are seeing a 5x higher clickthrough rate, 2x higher opportunities created and 30% higher opportunity revenue as a result.”
“We’ve recently begun encouraging teams to focus on demand units, rather than leads, because it aligns marketing, sales and product against the same goals, thereby improving the bottom line of a business,” said Kerry Cunningham, Sr.Research Director and Team Leader, Demand Creation Strategies at SiriusDecisions. “The key to aligning these three teams depends heavily on having access to both internal and external data that provides a complete view of that demand unit, so all activities are coordinated and cohesive.”
Lattice’s orchestration capabilities are currently in beta, and will be launched more broadly in 1H 2018. To learn more about how Lattice’s new platform will power the segmentation needs of data-driven marketers and enable them to orchestrate multi-channel campaigns, come visit us at Booth #21 at the SiriusDecisions Technology Exchange, October 30-November 1, in Austin.


