Pendo Systems Releases Version 4.0

05 Mar 2018

Designed to better support the needs of the business user; significantly reduce the reliance on IT; enhance overall business productivity
Pendo Systems is delighted to announce the release of Version 4.0 of the highly successful Pendo Machine Learning Platform (PMLP). The new release enables firms to significantly enhance overall productivity and improve business performance, whilst always keeping the core business user requirements front and center. Version 4.0 incorporates a number of new capabilities including a significantly improved Machine Learning toolset which accelerates time to implementation as well as offering the ability to tackle more complex Machine Learning processing challenges.
Other key features include the capacity to create training data via an enhanced UI which streamlines the complex management, classification and processing of all documents and enables users to train models against it. New connectivity options with CMIS (Content Management Interoperability Services) support and web crawling have also been added. The upgraded solution now includes new plugins that integrate seamlessly with other systems to provide access to a range of Machine Learning algorithms.
Phillip Dodds
Phillip Dodds, Pendo Systems CTO, commented, “Version 4.0 is a significant step forward for the firm because it has been specifically designed to be even more ‘business user’ friendly. By enabling onsite training of models that are less IT-dependent means our clients can now use their own data to train Machine Learning algorithms in an agile and cost-effective way, irrespective of whether it is behind their own firewall or in a secure cloud environment. These features, combined with significant enhancements to our proprietary query language and the existing UX, means the highly flexible Pendo Platform provides a solid foundation for all companies who are looking to adopt unstructured Machine Learning capabilities to enhance business productivity and exploit new opportunities. The platform is tried, tested and has been in constant use for the past two years.”
Pam Pecs Cytron
Pam Pecs Cytron, CEO at Pendo Systems concluded, “The release of version 4.0 is a further demonstration of our ruthless commitment to continued product innovation. Empowering the business user is an essential component of our strategy and this approach is already paying handsome dividends in terms of new user adoption. Across the financial services and insurance spectrum, we are seeing a number of common trends emerging in terms of the benefits our clients are already deriving from the Pendo Platform. Accelerating cost takeout strategies, automating lending decision support, improved policy control, enabling better AML and enhanced STP & Risk Management capabilities, to name just a few, all feature very highly on their agendas, and there is so much more we can deliver. We truly believe the Pendo Platform is changing the way our clients can exploit the value of unstructured data. Version 4.0 is another major step on the journey and is already enabling Pendo to help unlock even more value to our users.”


