Talk Fusion Releases Its Most Powerful Video Chat Product To Date

17 Feb 2018

The Reengineered Application Includes Permanent Chat Rooms, Custom URLs, Superior Contact Management, Immersive Video Support, And Powerful Desktop, File, And Screen Sharing—All Powered By Groundbreaking WebRTC Technology
Florida-based video marketing company Talk Fusion released several breakthrough enhancements to its two-time award-winning Video Chat product. The reengineered application includes permanent chat rooms, custom URLs, superior contact management, immersive video support, and powerful desktop, file, and screen sharing—all powered by groundbreaking WebRTC technology.
Ryan Page
As the forerunner in real-time communication, WebRTC eliminates the need for third-party plugins, successfully streamlining communication and providing an enhanced and more secure user experience. With the introduction of new WebRTC-powered features, Talk Fusion is setting a new disruptive standard for the video communication industry. “Essentially, it’s an entirely new app for our users,” explains Talk Fusion Chief Technical Officer Ryan Page. “Plus, with superior WebRTC audio quality, we’re introducing a state-of-the-art voice-only calling option that utilizes some of the latest tech advancements in existence today.”
Giving users the ability to make free and clear audio calls to and from any location around the world, Talk Fusion has revealed a new way to connect, share, and build.
“It’s quality you can see and hear,” explains Page. “We’re bringing our users a product that is as dynamic as it is simple.”
Packaged within a stunning, intuitive new interface, the all-new Video Chat gives users more control and flexibility than ever before. “It’s a remarkable product that adapts to you, not the other way around,” explains company Founder & CEO Bob Reina.
Prior to today’s much-anticipated launch, Talk Fusion gave members of its exclusive product-testing group, the VIP Product Council, a first look at the latest enhancements. “We’re already beginning to receive glowing feedback from our VIP Product Council members and global user base.”
As Talk Fusion moves into Q2, the company will continue to set a new pace for future enhancements to its Video Suite, which—alongside Video Chat—includes Live Meetings, Video Email, Video Newsletters, and Sign-up Forms.
“This is some of the most advanced technology we’ve ever developed,” explains Reina, “but it’s only the beginning for us.” Known for its history of chasing after progress and innovation, Talk Fusion is certainty no stranger to revolutionary upgrades. “Our intention has always been to challenge the status quo, which is why we’re continually developing new, innovative ways to both unify and improve the global communication experience.”
Talk Fusion’s all-new Video Chat product is now available to the public through the iTunes App Store and Google Playfor both Apple and Android users. The app is free to download and includes unlimited video, voice, and messaging services from any device to every device.
Home of the award-winning Talk Fusion Video Suite, Talk Fusion is dedicated to helping businesses stand out from the competition, increase sales and profits, and keep their customers coming back. Talk Fusion offers dynamic ways to make marketing more engaging, memorable, and persuasive with video.
Talk Fusion’s innovative products are marketed person-to-person by Independent Associates in more than 140 countries. Established in 2007 by Founder & CEO Bob Reina, Talk Fusion fosters a strong commitment to Giving Back to family, friends, communities, and animal charities across the world.


