Nuance OmniPage Server 2 Delivers Powerful Document Conversion Solution

16 Apr 2018

New Features Include Enhanced User Experience, Integrated Document Classification Capabilities, and Enhanced Language Support
Nuance Communications today announced OmniPage Server 2, the newest version of Nuance OmniPage Server, featuring several optimisations including an enhanced user experience with flexible configuration options, API-enabled document classification and cloud deployment options through Amazon Web Services and Microsoft Azure. Nuance OmniPage Server 2 extends the capabilities of previous offerings, delivering an industrial-strength, reliable, fast and accurate solution for high volume document and image conversion.
The most significant enhancement in OmniPage Server 2, the updated user interface with new simplified installation option, enables set-up on a single machine in minutes making it accessible to new audiences. Dealers and organisations without networking or server configuration expertise can install and begin executing high-volume document conversion processes almost immediately. Once setup, users will immediately appreciate the enhanced Web Conversion Client, with its intuitive interface, as they configure and run document conversion jobs.
OmniPage Server 2’s document conversion and classification services are foundational technologies for robotic process automation applications. Document-based information must be converted to machine-readable formats and be identified by “type” to perform advanced analytics. Utilising OmniPage Server, organisations can drive analytics, streamline document-based business processes and accurately deliver information to an unlimited number of folders and subfolders. “Folder watching” capabilities can detect PDF and image files and automatically designate them for conversion, bringing greater efficiencies to the end-to-end document conversion workflow.
Tracey Mustacchio
“OmniPage Server 2 is the most powerful and versatile document conversion solution offered to date,” says Tracey Mustacchio, senior vice president of product & marketing, Nuance Document Imaging. “The new installation experience allows a nearly turnkey setup for dealers and end users, while the integration with our document classifier API enables even greater efficiencies to the document conversion and classification process. The ability to host the solution in the cloud will give users greater flexibility, scalability and robustness to support their growing document conversion needs.”
Nuance OmniPage Server 2 converts PDFs and other popular file types into searchable PDFs and other editable files. Other updates include improved OCR accuracy and speed, support for right-to-left languages, such as Arabic and Hebrew, and enhanced Intelligent Workflow Runner, which when combined with the Workflow Designer can easily create more complex workflows.
Nuance Communications, Inc. is a leading provider of voice and language solutions for businesses and consumers around the world. Its technologies, applications and services make the user experience more compelling by transforming the way people interact with devices and systems. Every day, millions of users and thousands of businesses experience Nuance’s proven applications.


