AI-Powered Ad Exchange Codewise Appoints John Malatesta As President

25 Apr 2018

The Company Supports Skyrocketing Revenue Growth By Strengthening Its Operational Alignment Around The Customer
Codewise, the industry-first provider of AI-powered ad exchange, DSP, and online ad measurement and optimization platforms for digital marketers, recognized by the Financial Times as one of the fastest-growing companies in Europe, announced the appointment of Dr. John Malatesta as the company’s first President. John Malatesta will report to Robert Gryn, CEO and owner of Codewise and a member of the Forbes Technology Council.
John Malatesta
John Malatesta, a Doctor of Economics and a member of the Forbes Agency Council, has held multiple senior leadership roles at Fortune 500 companies and high-growth startups during his 22-year career in the software industry. In his new role, he will be responsible for the strategic and operational direction and management of all Codewise departments and for the full P&L. He will also continue to serve as Chief Revenue and Marketing Officer at Codewise.
“The exponential growth of Codewise’s revenue, pioneering new innovative technologies and the progressive expansion into new geographies now calls for the deployment of a state-of-the-art operational management structure. John’s delegated responsibility for the effective management of all operations will enable me to dedicate even more of my time and resources to high-priority strategic decisions and to breakthrough and visionary technological enhancements of the AdTech ecosystem,” said Robert Gryn, CEO and Owner of Codewise.
“I am honored to continue serving Codewise as our company continues its exponential global expansion. As a result of the consistent alignment of product innovation and customer experience to our clients’ ever-changing needs, since our inception in 2012 we’ve been able to continuously achieve a profitable 290% average annual growth rate. Meeting the new demanding expectations that the AdTech industry will set in the future requires continuous enhancements of our processes and operations as well as the deployment and coordinated management of additional industry-leading engineering, product management and customer-facing resources. This calls for an even stronger planning and operational alignment across all our departments, to be achieved with a unified and adaptive company governance built around each and every customer,” said John Malatesta, President of Codewise.


