Viscira® Deploys A Next-Generation Augmented Reality (AR) Training Solution For Pharma Sales Reps

23 May 2018

Company Develops a Sophisticated AR Solution for a Top-Five Pharma Sales Force Using the Microsoft HoloLens
Viscira, a leading provider of digital marketing solutions and software products for the life sciences industry, announced today the release of an Augmented Reality solution designed to provide sales-force training for one of the top five pharmaceutical companies in the world. The solution utilizes the Microsoft HoloLens, a mixed-reality, holographic headset that incorporates both virtual reality and augmented reality by seamlessly blending high-definition holograms with the real world.
Read More: Trescon’s World Blockchain Summit To Touchdown In Frankfurt
The Augmented Reality solution developed by Viscira allows the user to view and physically interact with a 3D image of a healthy, functioning heart. Viewers can then see the impact of certain diseases on the appearance and performance of the organ. Additionally, the training instructor can review the same imagery simultaneously with the participants, allowing him or her to provide additional real-time, voice-over commentary and education.
By using this type of interactive solution, learners enter an immersive environment where they are able to view and interact with dynamic, functioning organs, as opposed to reviewing and memorizing how the organs look in static, textbook form. This Augmented Reality training solution was first used by the company during a live training program in March 2018. The solution was very positively received by the client, senior management, and the field sales force, and was instrumental in driving mastery of the relevant biology, cardiology disease state, and existing treatment approaches.
Read More: Trescon’s World Blockchain Summit To Touchdown In Frankfurt
Some of the commentary Viscira received from training participants included:
“Helped me visualize the heart and lungs in 3D. The key concepts were explained in an easy-to-follow voice.”
“It was helpful seeing the catheter being used rather than just imagining it.”
“We have learned about the heart through text and PowerPoint. This was a much more interactive and dynamic instruction.”
“It gave a very ‘realistic’ perspective on how the heart functions.”
Viscira is very excited about continuing to use Augmented Reality to help clients elevate their training programs, and for other educational and marketing needs. “This training model featuring AR and the Microsoft HoloLens is an ideal platform for making the field force more effective and for advancing commercial selling efforts in general. The initiative was the company’s first implementation of AR in an enterprise-wide capacity,” explained Rodwin Pabello, Viscira’s Director of New Product Development.
Read More: Interview With Alexandre Debecker, Chief Growth Officer – Ubisend


