Gateway Architects Signs Strategic Partnership Agreement With India-Based Circle Star

01 Feb 2018

The Agreement Enables Circle Star To Offer Gateway’s SAP Optimization Solution, Meister, To Its Indian Customers
Gateway Architects announced the signing of a development partnership with Circle Star Ltd, a leading consulting and business development company based in Bangalore, India. The agreement enables Circle Star to offer Gateway’s SAP optimization solution, Meister, to its Indian customers.
Meister is a ground-breaking, proprietary platform that unleashes the power of data in SAP, enabling transparency, accuracy, velocity and agility on a real-time basis at a fraction of the time and cost. It unlocks SAP and information systems in an innovative and revolutionary manner so that data is visible, extensible, streamlined, controlled, secured and efficiently accessible via any device, anywhere, at any time – without sacrificing security.
Yaron Meerfeld
“We’re excited about this unique business opportunity for both Gateway and Circle Star and see it as the launching point for bringing Meister and its industry-changing, SAP-enhancing capabilities to the Indian market,” said Yaron Meerfeld, Gateway Architects’ co-founder and CEO. “Circle Star has a long track record of performance and excellence and this partnership will enable Meister to expand its influence on both a U.S. and international scale.”
“Circle Star will benefit by being one of the first business development partners to leverage the Meister middleware solution to bring additional value and disruptive solutions to the market,” said Meerfeld. “Customers will benefit from gaining access to a powerful, cutting-edge SAP-optimization tool that saves time and significantly reduces costs while unleashing opportunities in data acquisition and performance.”
“We at Circle Star recognized the breakthrough technology presented by Gateway Architects to SAP’s partners and users. Indian companies are significantly invested in SAP while the Indian SI are SAP’s leading partners in India and worldwide – 40 percent in North America,” said Rajiv Varma, CEO and team leader at Circle Star India. “We are looking forward to establishing Gateway Architects’ presence in India for the benefit of our Indian partners and their customers.”


