ContextVision Steps Into The Next Generation Of Image Enhancement Products

16 Mar 2018

The New Generation Is Built On The Combination Of Their GOP Technology And Deep Learning Algorithms And The Development Of A First Product, Designed For X-ray, Has Started
ContextVision, a medical technology software company specializing in image analysis and artificial intelligence, today announced that the company is starting to develop a new generation of image enhancement products. The new generation is built on the combination of their GOP technology and deep learning algorithms and the development of a first product, designed for X-ray, has started.
Anita Tollstadius
“Our strong focus on research & development the last few years is paying off. We have excelled within image enhancement for the last three decades and with the addition of deep learning and artificial intelligence technologies, we have a winning formula for keeping our leading position for a very long time,” said Anita Tollstadius, CEO of ContextVision.
With the flexible and robust GOP technology, ContextVision pioneered the image enhancement market 30 years ago, and is still the global market leader. Since 2014, the company has invested significantly to broaden the technology platform by developing artificial intelligence with focus on deep learning technology. Combining the GOP and deep learning technologies will bring new features and more value to the products.
“We have a very strong position in the market, and we intend to continue to deliver the best possible image quality to our customers. It is exciting to enter a new era and combine two powerful technologies to develop a new generation of products,” said Tollstadius.
By performing research and a set of pre-studies, the company has developed a lot of know-how, which has been proven in international competitions. In addition, ContextVision recently received a U.S. patent approval for a new deep learning technology to automatically optimize image quality.
“We have developed a lot of new competencies in the company and in addition to upgrading our present portfolio this will also lead to completely new products in the future, both for the medical imaging market and for the digital pathology market,” said Tollstadius.


