ID R&D Releases New AI-Based Biometric Security Solution That Increases User Authentication Accuracy By 40%

15 Jun 2018

AI-based Products — Built For Mobile And IoT Applications — Are Now Available Through the Samsung SDS Digital Identity Platform
ID R&D, the award-winning biometric solutions provider offering proprietary AI-based behavioral, voice, and anti-spoofing user authentication capabilities, today released the newest version of its most advanced voice biometric security solution, IDVoice. Additionally, ID R&D is announcing that both IDVoice and its behavioral biometric security solution, IDBehave, are now available on the Samsung SDS Digital Identify Platform.
IDVoice is a mobile-optimized voice biometric solution that instantly authenticates users by evaluating more than 100 unique characteristics that comprise a user’s biometric voice signature. ID R&D’s unique and highly accurate voice biometrics use a low-memory footprint, which is perfectly suited for mobile and IoT applications.
Both the newest release of IDVoice, as well as ID R&D’s behavioral biometrics solution IDBehave, are now available via the Samsung SDS Digital Identity Platform. IDBehave is an advanced behavioral biometrics solution that identifies unique patterns in the way people interact with devices in order to accurately verify their identity. This provides an extra layer of security to mobile devices beyond simple passwords. Utilizing both solutions, the Samsung platform offers enhanced security solutions that minimize fraud and protect consumers.
Read More: Scale To Discuss How Self-Driving Cars Will Handle Unexpected Real-World Scenarios At The Information’s Autonomous Vehicles Summit
Richard Lobovsky
In a recent Samsung SDS blog, Richard Lobovsky, Vice President of Enterprise Solutions at Samsung SDSA, wrote: “The Samsung SDS Digital Identity Platform features Nexsign, a FIDO certified risk-based biometric authentication solution, which forgoes passwords in favor of biological information, such as fingerprint, facial or voice scan, to authenticate customers. ID R&D’s voice biometrics allows Nexsign to verify user identities by the way they speak (voice biometrics) or interact with devices (behavioral biometrics). Through the platform, users create a passphrase that could be as simple as a favorite sports team or the name of a pet, which they authenticate by speaking that passphrase into the phone.”
The latest upgrades to IDVoice included in the Samsung SDS Digital Identify Platform are:
Anti-spoofing capabilities: IDVoice now addresses three types of attacks: recorded voices, computer-generated voices, and computer-modified speech.
A smaller footprint: The newest generation of IDVoice algorithms have a much smaller footprint, which increases usability on mobile and IoT devices. Algorithms can be as small as 2 MB.
Accuracy: The newest IDVoice version combines a proprietary p-vector approach with AI methodology to improve accuracy by 40%.
Read More: Jane.Ai Launches To Eliminate Wasted Time In The Workplace By Putting The Power Of Artificial Intelligence At The Fingertips Of All Employees
Alexey Khitrov
“Our goal at ID R&D is to make logging into a device, app, or website completely stress-free and frictionless,” said Alexey Khitrov, CEO of ID R&D. “We’re excited to work with Samsung SDS to offer our advanced AI-based voice biometrics, anti-spoofing, and keystroke dynamics. A rapidly growing number of companies are turning to ID R&D to minimize the time taken to complete security checks and maximize the time customers spend on apps, websites, or devices. The ID R&D team, with over 25 years of experience in biometrics, is delivering simplified authentication for end users across a variety of industries including education, healthcare, banking, finance, automotive, and more – while offering unmatched security for vendors and organizations.”
ID R&D is an award-winning provider of multi-modal biometric security solutions based in New York, NY. With more than 25 years of experience in biometrics, the company’s management and development teams apply the latest scientific breakthroughs to significantly enhance authentication experiences. ID R&D combines a science-driven seamless authentication experience with the capabilities of a leading research and development team. ID R&D’s focus is on behavioral biometrics, voice biometrics, keystroke dynamics, and biometric fusion. In March 2018, the company was named a top-ten AI startup by Microsoft Ventures.


