How Digital Healthcare Is Changing Everything: Thought Leaders Meet To Discuss Innovation In Digital Health At USC’s 11th Annual Body Computing Conference

28 Aug 2017

On Friday, September 22, the University of Southern California(USC) Center for Body Computing (CBC), part of the Keck School of Medicine of USC, will curate conversations to provide a comprehensive understanding of how digital health is touching every aspect of our lives – from performance, behavior and decision-making to medicine, cybersecurity, the military, sports and public policy –at its 11th annual Body Computing Conference (click link to register).
Thought leaders across a broad spectrum come together for the one-day summit to offer local, national and global perspectives on the evolving convergence of health and digital technology. Speakers will shed light on a wide range of topics including the California-led cybersecurity initiative in health IT and L.A.’s 2028 Olympics plan to transform the Olympic Village into a connected health space. The event also includes demonstrations and discussions on the impact of unique wearable sensors to track personal fitness, enhance elite athletic performance and train the next generation of warfighters. And panelists will debate and advocate for the power of digital health tools to be able to combat the critical global issue of diabetes or build on-demand transportation safety nets to address the rapid rise in our aging population.
“Digital tools are making healthcare omnipresent, they are no longer a spoke in the wheel of our lives – they are the hub,” said Leslie Saxon, MD, founder and executive director of the USC Center for Body Computing. “We’re proud to be one of the only digital health conferences that brings together such an eclectic mix of global thought leaders to demonstrate, debate, and introduce the latest products, research, and investments that are accelerating the integration of digital health into every aspect of our lives.”
The exclusive 250-guest capacity crowd includes digital health start-ups and venture capitalists, small and large company executives, non-profit and government organizations, students, academic leaders and media.
Speakers from the California Governor’s Office of Business and Economic Development (GO-Biz), AARP Foundation, Abbott, an Academy Award-winning producer, Boston Celtics, Brent Scowcroft Center on International Security, ESPN, GE Software, Goldman Sachs, Joslin Diabetes Center, Karten Design, Lyft, NBA, NFL Players Association, Tastemade, UnitedHealthcare, U.S. Army, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, U.S. Marines, VSP Global and others will take center stage. Hosted on USC’s main Los Angeles campus, these experts join the innovators from across USC schools including: Annenberg School of Communications, Brain & Creativity Institute, Institute of Creative Technologies and the medical experts at Keck Medicine of USC. Click here for full list of speakers.
“Whether you are an elite athlete using biometrics to achieve peak performance where milliseconds can make a million-dollar difference, a military commander making crucial choices based on collective team health dynamics, a healthcare system protecting patient privacy or an individual looking to be empowered to enhance personal health outcomes, this event showcases today’s realities and tomorrow’s promise of digital health,” added Saxon.
According to Rock Health, digital health companies raised $4.2 billion in 2016 – double the amount raised in 2013 – with wearables and biosensors representing $312 million. GMI Insights projects the digital health market will grow to $379 billion by 2024. Last year, virtual reality reached an almost $1 billion market growth in health care specific applications and the adoption of artificial intelligence, apps and mHealth tools are poised for promise when it comes to individual and population health management. The USC CBC serves as a hub at the convergence of a fast-paced and growing digital technology revolution when it comes to medicine, acting as the research project lead and product design partner for small and large companies who want to maximize doctor efficiency, increase access, decrease costs and increase patient empowerment, engagement and health outcomes.


