Kim Technologies Expands Into HR Software Market

10 Oct 2017

Award Winning AI-Enabled Platform Optimizes HR Service Delivery
Kim Technologies, the award-winning artificial intelligence-enabled automation platform, today announced its formal entry into the Human Resources software market at this week’s HR Technology Conference and Expo in Las Vegas. This follows the company’s wide acceptance within the legal and contract management markets and builds on its continued momentum in 2017, which has seen a number of high-profile customer wins and prestigious industry awards.
The Kim platform leverages Artificial Intelligence capabilities to allow knowledge workers, such as HR professionals and lawyers, to configure complex applications in hours, with no coding or IT support required.  It is a fully integrated case, document, workflow and knowledge management system that also provides cognitive capabilities to assess the meaning of documents, route work intelligently and find information. The platform utilizes multiple patent-pending AI technologies to achieve this, including neural networks, machine learning and deep learning.
Robert Farina
“Our move into the HR market was a natural one as the technology platform that we have used to optimize legal operations and contract management adapts beautifully to solving the problems that HR service delivery professionals face,” said Kim’s CEO, Robert Farina. “The HR software arena is well established, but still heavily populated by traditional technologies which are rapidly showing their age alongside next-generation alternatives such as Kim. We see a range of opportunities, from customers who are still married to their legacy systems but are looking to add the kind of state-of-the-art capabilities that Kim provides for HR Service Delivery and Document Management, to those wishing to get a start on using AI capabilities in their departments or to make an innovative, future-proof first investment in these kinds of systems. Our HR beta projects have demonstrated huge value across the spectrum.”
Richard Yawn
“Think of it as HR transformation simplified,” said Richard Yawn, Kim’s Chief Technology Officer. “Kim solves the dilemma typically faced by HR software buyers forced to choose between the cost and complexity of implementing large, complex systems that require a significant level of custom development, or cobbling together a series of point solutions that are narrow with little-to-no flexibility.  Now HR professionals can automate their own processes, workflows and documents for any stage of the employee lifecycle – from onboarding, through day-to-day employee relations and performance management activities, all the way to exit interviews.”


