Goertek’s Next-Generation VR HMD Reference Design In Partnership With Qualcomm Highlighted At 2018 GDC

22 Mar 2018

Goertek Brings Extensive Experience In Qualcomm Mobile Platforms And Has Provided Design Solutions In Terms Of Industrial Design, Architecture, Thermal Management, Acoustics, Optics, And Electronic Circuitry For VR HMD Reference Designs To Unleash The Full Potential Of The Snapdragon 845 Mobile Platform In The VR Sector
Goertek, a global leader in total system design and manufacturing, in partnership with Qualcomm, developed the next-generation of the virtual reality (VR) head mounted display (HMD) reference platform based on the Qualcomm Snapdragon 845 mobile platform. The new HMD was displayed at the 2018 Game Developers Conference (GDC) held in San Francisco on March 19.
As members of the Qualcomm VR HMD Accelerator Program, Goertek and Qualcomm have jointly worked on VR HMD reference designs based on the Snapdragon 820, 821 and 835 mobile platforms. Goertek brings extensive experience in Qualcomm mobile platforms and has provided design solutions in terms of industrial design, architecture, thermal management, acoustics, optics, and electronic circuitry for VR HMD reference designs to unleash the full potential of the Snapdragon 845 mobile platform in the VR sector.
This new generation of HMD includes the latest eye-tracking technology. When the users’ gazes are tracked accurately and in real-time, content creators are given another user input mechanism to increase the realism and experience of VR. Foveated rendering allows for graphics processing to increase in the areas where the user is focused. Interpupillary distance is also easily measured and adjusted to simplify the setup process.
In addition, 6 degrees of freedom (6DoF) inside-out tracking, new TOF/SLM camera design, and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) deliver room-scale, the ability to track the body and its location within a room. The user can then move freely around the XR environment without cables or separate room sensors. A boundary system is also included in the SDK that helps content creators manage when the user approaches real-world boundary situations. The new 6DOF controller based on ultrasonic technology further improves user experience as well.
“This is a landmark product for the entire VR industry,” said Hugo Swart, the head of Virtual and Augmented Reality Business Group at Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. “First of all, many VR brands can create an unprecedented immersive and realistic experience for users with the powerful processing capacity of the Qualcomm Snapdragon 845 mobile platform. In addition, VR vendors can rapidly develop their own customized VR HMDs, based on Goertek’s leading integration and manufacturing capabilities, allowing them to reduce R&D costs and focus on user experience and content.”
“This represents another successful cooperation between Goertek and Qualcomm in the field of VR,” said Edwin Yu, Vice President of Goertek. “By working with world-leading vendors like Qualcomm, Goertek is committed to creating more innovative and revolutionary products for users, by combining its vertical integration and technology integration capabilities to drive the development of the VR industry.”
Goertek Inc. is a global leading high-tech company which was established in June 2001, and listed on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange in 2008, with focus on the R&D, manufacturing and marketing of high-precision components (Acoustics, Sensor, Optoelectronic and 3D Packaging Module) and smart hardware (VR/AR, Wearable, Hearable, AI, Home and etc.). Goertek is devoted to be a first-class company and fostered long-term cooperation with global leading high-tech companies. Since it went public, Goertek has been growing rapidly with a compound annual growth rate above 40%.


