Arvato Partners With Parrot Inc.

22 Mar 2018

Arvato SCM Solutions has partnered with Parrot Inc. and is now managing the company’s logistics and fulfillment services in North America out of its Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin facility. Arvato offers multiple solutions for Parrot Inc., US subsidiary of the leading European drone group: Main services provided will be distribution of drones to B2B and B2C customers in the USA and Canada as well as all warehousing, pick processes and returns management.
Andreas Barth
“It is Arvato’s declared goal to steadily expand the activities in North America and strengthen them with strategically important customers. That’s why I’m glad that Parrot Inc. has chosen to partner with Arvato. We consider that to be a great privilege,” says Andreas Barth, President Hightech & Entertainment at Arvato SCM Solutions.
Founded in France in 1994, Parrot has extended its activities over the years to more than 100 countries worldwide. Today, Parrot is the world’s number two of the consumer drone market. In addition to consumer drones, Parrot also offers business solutions including drones, software and services focusing on agriculture, 3D mapping, surveying, inspection and public safety. “North America is a key market for us as we continue to grow our consumer and professional drones’ offerings. Access to Arvato’s extensive network enhances our logistics and fulfillment, making the distribution of our products even more efficient to better meet our customers’ expectations,” says Michael Luke, General Manager of the Americas at Parrot Inc. USA.
Leon Walcott
The logistics solutions that Arvato will provide for Parrot Inc. at the approximately 540,000 square feet multi-brand distribution center in Pleasant Prairie, Wisconsin cover the entire warehousing, picking, packaging and transportation management for drone distribution, including all accessories and parts. “Additionally, the logistical services for Parrot Inc. encompass returns management as well as other value-added services such as the re-flashing of drones, repackaging or display building,” says Leon Walcott, Director Business Development Hightech & Entertainment at Arvato SCM Solutions.
He is convinced that the partnership between Arvato and Parrot Inc. will continue to develop well: “Our aim is to provide the highest quality services to our clients. And it’s also Parrot Inc. and their customers who benefit from that.”


