Autoliv And Veoneer Hold Investor Day Ahead Of Spin-off

01 Jun 2018

Autoliv, the worldwide leader in automotive safety systems, will today hold an Investor Day in Stockholm ahead of the spin-off of Veoneer, the trusted partner in mobility, which is to be completed on June 29, 2018 at which time Autoliv and Veoneer will become two independently listed companies, with the first day of trading of Veoneer common stock and SDRs planned for July 2, 2018.
During the Investor Day members of management of Autoliv and Veoneer will outline corporate strategy, operational strengths, technologies and innovation roadmaps and financial plans for their respective companies as stand-alone companies.
“The strategy is to build two companies focused on and dedicated to their respective markets, which we believe will unlock substantial additional value. I look forward to seeing both companies prosper on their own,” said Jan Carlson, Chairman, President and CEO of Autoliv (from June 29, President and CEO of Veoneer).
Autoliv Highlights
“Autoliv is the undisputed market leader in passive safety. The spin-off of the electronics business provides a great opportunity for us to build on this rich heritage and create an even stronger, more focused company for the future.” said Mikael Bratt, President Passive Safety (from June 29, President and CEO of Autoliv).
Fully focused on delivering on our 2020 targets.
–   Reiterating our 2020 targets of more than $10 billion in sales and an adjusted operating margin* of around 13%.
Balance Sheet strength.
–   After providing Veoneer with total cash liquidity of approximately $1.0 billion, Autoliv estimates its leverage ratio* of net debt* to EBITDA will be approximately 1.5x at the time of the completion of the spin-off. Adjusted for any discrete items, we aim to be close to our leverage ratio* target of 1x by end of 2019.
Long term sustainable market growth.
–   The passive safety market is expected to grow on average about 3% annually until 2025, based on approximately 2% average annual growth for light vehicle production and higher penetration rates for passive safety products. Long term we see additional growth from opportunities for more advanced airbag and seatbelt solutions for the future car with new seating configurations.
Autoliv has the tools to maintain its new market position.
–  Based on 50% or more order intake over the past three years, we look forward to significant sales and market share growth over the next few years. We have the tools to maintain our new position through flawless preparation and execution of the wave of orders, being close to our customers and staying ahead of our competitors with innovative solutions while exploring new avenues for growth.
Operational excellence is Autoliv’s DNA.
–   Our relentless focus on quality, robustness and operational excellence are key strengths which are at the core of our market leadership, quality leadership and business momentum.
Selected historical financial data for Autoliv Continuing Operations is attached as an appendix to this press release. Downloadable excel files of the financial data can be found on www.autoliv.com/investors.
Veoneer Highlights
“We are creating a trusted technology company for the mobility industry with an unparalleled history and track record in automotive safety. Veoneer is at the center of the revolution that is taking place in the automotive industry,” said Jan Carlson, President and CEO of Veoneer.


