WISeKey And IBM To Showcase Their Integrated Solution To Secure IoT At THINK2018 Conference

19 Mar 2018

WISeKey and IBM To Showcase Their Integrated Solution to Secure IoT at THINK2018 Conference
WISeKey International Holding Ltd, a leading Swiss cybersecurity and IoT solutions company, announced an integration with IBM (NYSE:IBM) to secure the Internet of Things (IoT) using WISeKey’s leading technology. The collaboration will provide enhanced security of sensitive data exchanged between devices across the IoT networks and the IBM Watson IoT Platform, by adding extended capabilities to secure IoT devices and the management thereof from a central location. By doing so, customers benefit from an increased trust in the data handled by their application, and a reduced risk of revenue loss due to cyber-attacks of all kinds thus leverage a greater value of their business.
IBM’s Watson IoT Platform is a cognitive system that learns from, and infuses intelligence into the physical world. Device manufacturers and businesses can use the power of Watson IoT Platform to build specialized, integrated solutions to solve their business challenges. Watson IoT Platform implements a “messaging broker” that allows the exchange of information between devices and business applications, using a secure Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) technology to bring authentication and data encryption. This implies a seamless integration with the WISeKey concept of Root of Trust (RoT) that delivers the digital identity that can be leveraged later in the Watson IoT platform.
WISeKey is the only vendor in the industry providing an integrated solution that combines a back-end certificate and device management system with a hardware “RoT”, a Secure Element (highly secure crypto chip) that protects the digital identity and certificates, to bring trust to the transmitted data through secure authentication of the device and related encryption of the data channel. Going one step further, the WISeKeyIoT components for IBM Watson IoT Platform are now made available to IBM’s technology users. An easy mechanism to create and deploy these digital certificates, as well as a “Security Broker” that manages communications by verifying the security level of the messages and implementing security and business rules, like renewing certificates, managing attributes and other key capabilities that make a difference when deploying securely large numbers of connected devices.


