Jaxx Liberty Brings Cryptocurrency To The Mass Market

02 Jul 2018

Available today in Canada, new multi-currency digital wallet empowers users to manage and secure their digital lives
Anthony Di Iorio
Decentral, a leading innovator in blockchain technologies, founded by Ethereum co-founder Anthony Di Iorio, today announced the launch of Jaxx Liberty, a new cryptocurrency wallet that will redefine the way people manage, secure, and interact with their digital assets. Jaxx Liberty overcomes the fragmentation in the cryptocurrency landscape by providing users a single, unified experience for accessing the tools they use day-to-day to manage their digital lives across more than 70 cryptocurrencies.
“Before the web browser, adoption of the Internet was limited to tech-savvy early adopters. That’s the stage we’re at today with cryptocurrency,” said Anthony Di Iorio, CEO and founder of Decentral & Jaxx. “Jaxx Liberty is the web browser for your digital assets, empowering the masses to adopt the benefits of cryptocurrency and blockchain.”
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
Jaxx Liberty builds on the success of Jaxx, one of the most popular cryptocurrency wallets, downloaded by millions. The new interface introduces a unified dashboard and module-based approach to provide information that everyday people need to navigate the cryptocurrency ecosystem through features including news, market data, portfolio and a multi-chain Block Explorer. In keeping with Decentral’s strong values around privacy, Jaxx Liberty is built around a business model that does not collect users’ personal information and respects their autonomy. Jaxx Liberty, like all previous versions of Jaxx, is a free service.
“As the popularity of cryptocurrency continues to grow, the ecosystem has become increasingly fragmented,” said Di Iorio. “Jaxx Liberty takes an important step towards unifying and empowering the blockchain community to take control of their digital lives.”
Read More: How “System Mindfulness” Is Changing The FMCG Industry
Today’s launch of Jaxx Liberty, the flagship product of the Decentral Project, is the first in a series of products coming in 2018 aimed at informing and empowering the masses to take control of their digital lives through decentralized technologies like blockchain and cryptocurrency. In the coming months, Decentral will launch additional products including:
Decentral Unity (JXX) Loyalty Token – A rewards system to encourage people to use Jaxx Liberty and engage with our partners.
Decentral Academy – A trusted information portal for everyday people to access unbiased, comprehensive information about the power and potential of decentralized technologies like blockchain and cryptocurrency.
MyJaxx – A gamified experience to promote engagement with partners, designed to entertain and inform people as they navigate the Jaxx ecosystem.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc


