Qualcomm Datacenter Technologies Collaborates With Hatch Entertainment

21 Feb 2018

Collaboration Will Help to Deliver Next-Generation Cloud-Based Gaming Experiences to Mobile Devices
Qualcomm Datacenter Technologies, Inc., a subsidiary of Qualcomm Incorporated, and Hatch Entertainment, a new subscription games-on-demand service for mobile gaming, today announced they will collaborate on delivering next-generation cloud-based gaming experiences on servers based on the Qualcomm Centriq™ 2400 – the world’s first 10nm server processor. Hatch’s innovative online streaming delivery model, coupled with the highly scalable 48-core Qualcomm Centriq 2400, offers a disruptive new solution that delivers cloud-based games in real-time and improved economics to users.
The Qualcomm Centriq 2400 processor is optimized for cloud workloads and designed to deliver throughput performance for highly threaded cloud native applications that are developed as micro-services and deployed for scale-out. Hatch Entertainment’s innovative cloud gaming technology, optimized for low-latency gaming performance over mobile data networks, delivers full-featured games at 60 fps over the Internet with less than half the bandwidth required for video-based game streaming solutions or streaming HD video.
For Hatch, Qualcomm Centriq 2400’s 48 core processor will provide exceptional compute density allowing for a large number of game instances per server. Hatch will offer gamers high-quality, premium gaming in the cloud, while developers will be able to more easily and affordably create synchronous multiplayer games. Moreover, users will be able to enjoy on-demand access to games via their mobile devices, freeing up space on phones and facilitating social features such as collaboration and competition with friends and family, and gameplay sharing in real-time.
“The Qualcomm Centriq 2400 server processor was purpose built for cloud to deliver exceptional performance-per-watt and performance-per-dollar,” said Vishal Gupta, Vice President, Business Development, Qualcomm Datacenter Technologies, Inc. “We bring high compute density and energy efficiency with Qualcomm Centriq 2400 to help drive Hatch’s innovative cloud game streaming solution.”
“Our vision is to let people discover, play and share great games instantly and in real-time, bringing people together over games they love,” said Juhani Honkala, founder and chief executive officer, Hatch Entertainment. “Our collaboration with Qualcomm Datacenter Technologies is a significant leap forward in advancing our existing gaming technology and platform, which offers users a fun and completely new kind of gaming experience on mobile.”
Hatch will be showcasing their solution in the Qualcomm Booth (Hall 3, Booth #E310) at Mobile World Congress in Barcelona, February 26 – March 1, 2018.
Qualcomm invents breakthrough technologies that transform how the world connects and communicates. When we connected the phone to the Internet, the mobile revolution was born. Today, our inventions are the foundation for life-changing products, experiences, and industries. As we lead the world to 5G, we envision this next big change in cellular technology spurring a new era of intelligent, connected devices and enabling new opportunities in connected cars, remote delivery of health care services, and the IoT — including smart cities, smart homes, and wearables. Qualcomm Incorporated includes our licensing business, QTL, and the vast majority of our patent portfolio. Qualcomm Technologies, Inc., a subsidiary of Qualcomm Incorporated, operates, along with its subsidiaries, all of our engineering, research and development functions, and all of our products and services businesses, including, the QCT semiconductor business.
Hatch Entertainment, a subsidiary of Rovio Entertainment, was founded in 2016 in Espoo, Finland, with a vision to change the way people play games – to create a place on mobile where people can enjoy new social experiences together. With social features never seen before in mobile gaming, on Hatch players can easily collaborate or compete with their friends and family, and share gameplay moments as they happen. Hatch brings cloud gaming to mobile for the first time, with no downloads, updates or in-app purchases.
Read More: Crypto Collectible ‘Etherbots’ Partners With WAX Tokens And OPSkins Marketplace


