Nuance Continues To Lead In Delivering Matured AI-Powered Enterprise Intelligent Assistants

06 Jul 2018

New Report Helps Those Organizations Understand What Criteria They Should Consider When Evaluating Prospective Enterprise Intelligent Assistants Solutions 
Nuance, a leader in conversational AI innovation, announced it has been awarded the highest combined rating of Intelligent Assistant (IA) and bot vendors for the second consecutive year in Opus Research’s “Decision Makers’ Guide to Enterprise Intelligent Assistants.”
Opus Research on Enterprise Intelligent Assistants Focused Heavily on Maturity of Offerings
The report presents a comprehensive assessment of IA solution providers with a focus on enterprise-grade solutions and ranks each organization on technology, the maturity of offerings, track record and future plan and vision. Key differentiators for Nuance —
a full suite of intelligent digital engagement offerings
ability to handle typed and spoken conversations on one platform
According to Opus, enterprise spending on Intelligent Assistants will exceed a projected $2 billion in 2018, heading for $5.5 billion in 2021 – a 67% CAGR for the next five years. This is a result of what Opus calls “the perfect storm where technological advancement in Speech Processing, NLU, machine learning and knowledge management coincides with (or gives rise to) heightened levels of comfort and confidence in human-to-machine communications.”
Follow Us
The Market for AI-Powered Enterprise Intelligent Assistants and Customer Engagement Solutions is Growing Rapidly
At the time of this announcement, Dan Miller, Lead Analyst at Opus Research, said, “The rapid adoption and use of new, conversational end-points and services may not have caught every business by surprise, but it has them scrambling to meet the growing demand from their end customers for intelligent, conversational brand experiences.”
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
Dan added, “This report helps those organizations understand what criteria they should consider when evaluating prospective solutions and provides an overview of vendor capabilities and track record, which can inform the process of getting an IA up and running successfully.”
Nuance received the combined top score leading 26 vendors. The company notably stood out for its impressive customer base, the high success rate for multiple verticals, and support of numerous devices and modalities. The list also listed companies — SundownAI, Verint, SmartAction, Synthetix, Omilia, and Verbio.
Read More: How “System Mindfulness” Is Changing The FMCG Industry
“As pioneers in bringing Conversational AI into the enterprise, we’ve seen first-hand the pressure today’s largest organizations face to deliver customer service that is fast, accurate and convenient,” said Robert Weideman, Executive Vice President and General Manager, Nuance Enterprise.
Robert added, “Nuance’s repeat performance and top ranking in the Opus Research report mirrors the results gained by the myriad enterprises that rely on our AI-powered customer engagement solutions.”
Currently, Nuance is recognized as a pioneer and leader in conversational AI innovations that bring intelligence to everyday work and life.  The company delivers solutions that can understand, analyze and respond to human language to increase productivity and amplify human intelligence.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications


