Bestmile Joins Renovo’s AWare Automated Mobility Ecosystem To Enable Robotaxi Fleet Management At Scale

04 Jun 2018

The Integration of Bestmile’s Mobility Services Platform Makes Highly Automated Vehicles Using Renovo’s AWare OS “Fleet Ready,” as Bestmile’s Platform Can Be Used To Deploy, Manage And Optimize Automated Mobility On Demand “Robotaxi” Services Using These Vehicles Regardless Of Type Or The Automated Driving System Used
Bestmile, the leading mobility services platform used to operate, manage, and optimize highly automated vehicle fleets, today announced it has joined mobility operating system (OS) maker Renovo’s AWare Ecosystem. The integration of Bestmile’s Mobility Services Platform makes highly automated vehicles using Renovo’s AWare OS “fleet ready,” as Bestmile’s platform can be used to deploy, manage and optimize automated mobility on demand “robotaxi” services using these vehicles regardless of type or the automated driving system used.
Raphael Gindrat
“For new mobility services to deliver on their promise to transform transportation, highly automated vehicles must be able to work together and use data from multiple sources to intelligently optimize performance,” said Raphael Gindrat, CEO of Bestmile. “We share Renovo’s vision of an open, interoperable, on-demand ecosystem where best-in-class technologies combine to bring about optimized automated mobility safely, quickly and economically, and are pleased to be a part of this ecosystem.”
Read More: Interview With Sam Kim, CEO, Lucidity
Bestmile’s technology enables highly automated vehicles to work together as intelligent fleets, delivering on-demand services with automated dispatching, traveler communication, route optimization, pooling, and energy and maintenance management. Advanced matching algorithms process traveler, vehicle and third-party data to send the right vehicle to the right place at the right time. Data intelligence and machine learning constantly improve system performance. Service providers use the platform to configure service areas, define key performance metrics such as vehicle utilization and wait times, and monitor services in real time.
Christopher Heiser
“Renovo’s AWare OS offers an open ecosystem of best-in-class technologies to make the deployment of highly automated vehicles in fleets safer, more secure and more efficient,” said Chris Heiser, co-founder and CEO of Renovo. “With Bestmile joining this ecosystem, our customers deploying automated mobility fleets now have access to Bestmile’s technology which offers a leading comprehensive technology suite to manage them. We will be using Bestmile’s Mobility Services Platform to help manage the Renovo fleet in California.”
Read More: Interview With Bryson Hill, CEO — Daplie
Renovo’s AWare OS allows diverse mobility technologies to work together to enable automated vehicles to operate safely and efficiently. This is important as automated mobility providers need to integrate with a wide range of embedded and external technologies such as onboard sensors, cameras, 3D mapping, remote access and control, and more.
The results of Bestmile and Renovo’s integration partnership will be shown later this year in San Jose, Calif., when Renovo’s double-digit fleet of highly automated vehicles will be demonstrated, managed by Bestmile, in a configuration delivering on-demand, door-to-door robotaxi services. The Bestmile platform has the tools mobility operators need to manage their mobility services, including a control center operator dashboard for autonomous fleet management and apps that travelers need to book rides, view vehicle locations and ETAs, and reach their destinations via optimized routes. The joint activities will provide valuable data for Renovo, Bestmile and its partners on the performance of passenger management, routing, vehicle tele-operation, sensors and lasers, 3D mapping, real-time traffic detection and response, and more.
AWare is already powering highly automated vehicle fleets including Renovo’s own on public roads today, and Bestmile’s technology is managing fleets on public streets and private sites on three continents. Bestmile joins the AWare ecosystem along with a growing list of leading companies in the automated mobility sector including Samsung, Verizon, Velodyne LiDAR, Parsons, INRIX, Argus Cyber Security, CARMERA, Affectiva, Phantom Auto, Metamoto, Civil Maps, Understand.ai and others.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive


