Logz.io Recognized By Gartner As A Cool Vendor In Performance Analysis AIOps Focus

19 May 2018

Logz.io, the leader in AI-powered log analysis, today announced the company has been recognized as a Cool Vendor in the Gartner report, “Cool Vendors in Performance Analysis, AIOps Focus” published May 4, 2018.
The Artificial Intelligence for IT Operations (AIOps) industry is quickly expanding with companies harnessing machine learning technology to cut through the clutter of machine data produced in complex IT environments. IT teams are struggling to manage their infrastructures and interpret the vast amounts of data generated by software applications, infrastructure hardware and IOT devices. By implementing this technology, users can easily extract important insights that would otherwise be overlooked to quickly solve problems before they cause major outages or lost customers.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive
According to the report, “By 2022, 40% of large enterprises will use artificial intelligence for IT operations (AIOps) tools to support or replace monitoring and service desk tasks, up from 5% today.”
Tomer Levy
“Our vision is to enable a world in which cloud operations relies more on AI and machine learning and less on humans having to manually search and set up alerts”, said Logz.io CEO, Tomer Levy. “Over the past few years, we heavily invested in our AI technology, culminating in the development of our patented Logz.io Insights, which has the unique ability to uncover intelligent insights and solutions so customers can resolve unseen issues before they can cause major damage to their businesses. We believe that being a part of Gartner’s ‘Cool Vendors’ report validates our unique approach to innovative machine learning solutions for IT Operations.”
The report stated, “Performance analysis vendors are attacking the growing complexity of IT environments with advanced analytics, scalability and AIOps capabilities. I&O leaders should consider how the innovative approaches of vendors in this research can deliver insight into their IT environments.”
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
The Logz.io Insights technology is made up of a portfolio of AI capabilities such as Application Insights and the newly patented Cognitive Insightsplatform. Logz.io’s unique technology transforms manual DevOps and IT Operations into an automated scientific process, by combining artificial intelligence and human interaction with data in order to contextualize data and offer viable solutions to events occurring within IT systems. Using collective intelligence, Cognitive Insights collects log events that match the knowledge collected online and then tags them to provide an early warning of potential malfunctions.
Cognitive Insights has helped many Logz.io customers uncover important insights from their log data. For example, Unity used Cognitive Insightsto reduce troubleshooting time dramatically and prevented downtime by identifying a correlation between a specific log message and a thread on their forum which discussed that particular bug, and ways to troubleshoot it.
Logz.io is thrilled to be considered a Cool Vendor in Performance Analysis, with an AIOps focus and will continue to develop even more machine learning technology to make log analysis easier and more effective.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World


