Attivo Networks® Sweeps The 13th Annual IT World Awards 2018

10 Jul 2018

Attivo Networks®, the award-winning leader in deception for cybersecurity threat detection, announced today that Network Products Guide, an industry-leading technology research and advisory guide, has recognized the company with four prestigious awards in the 13th Annual 2018 IT World Awards®. Attivo Networks triumphed, collecting wins for “Hot Company of the Year,” “Best Brand Experience Event,” “IT Products and Services for Finance, Banking and Insurance,” and “IT Products and Services for Healthcare.”
An annual achievements and recognition awards program with active participation from a broad spectrum of industry voices, the coveted IT World Awards recognition program encompasses the world’s best in organizational performance, products and services, hot technologies, executives and management teams, successful deployments, product management and engineering, customer satisfaction, and public relations in every area of information technology.
Read More: Millennial Parents Feel More Secured about AI Babysitting their Generation Alpha Kids!
Tushar Kothari
More than 80 judges from a broad spectrum of industry voices from around the world participated and their average scores determined the 2018 award winners. Winners will be honored in San Francisco on Monday, July 30, 2018 during the annual SVUS Red Carpet Awards Ceremony Dinner in San Francisco attended by the finalists, winners, judges and industry peers.
“It is an honor to be recognized for four IT World Awards,” said Tushar Kothari, CEO, Attivo Networks. “Attivo has applied its deep cybersecurity expertise to deliver authentic, easy to use, and scalable solutions for detecting advanced threats within today’s evolving attack surface. This win is a powerful validation of the innovation and value Attivo brings to the cybersecurity market.”
The ThreatDefend™ Deception and Response Platform is a powerful security control for an active defense, which provides early threat detection and adds offense-based strategies to change the asymmetry against attackers. The Attivo Networks deception solution takes an innovative approach to detection by dynamically setting traps and lures to create a virtual hall of mirrors, altering an attacker’s reality and imposing increased cost as they are forced to decipher what is real versus fake. The ThreatDefend platform reduces attacker dwell time by providing visibility throughout the attack lifecycle and detects activity that has bypassed traditional security controls. Designed for the most sophisticated human and automated attackers, the Attivo Networks deception technology is proven at global scale by Fortune 500 customers to accurately and efficiently detect threats. In addition to its high fidelity detection and alerts, the solution empowers an active defense with automated attack analysis, forensic reporting, and extensive 3rd party integrations for attack information sharing and automation of incident response actions.
Read More: UK and France to strengthen ties in Artificial Intelligence and data


