Big Squid, Inc. Announces New Powerful Machine Learning Platform Earning ‘Honorable Mention’ In 2018 Gartner Magic Quadrant

14 Mar 2018

Gartner’s Magic Quadrant for Data Science and Machine-Learning Platforms report lists Big Squid, Inc. as an Honorable Mention, based on its automated machine learning to forecast the movement of key business metrics through its Kraken platform.
Big Squid, Inc., a leading machine learning and predictive analytics platform, is pleased to announce the release of its Kraken platform. Kraken, through self-service machine learning, will bring powerful analytical insights to customers. Building on the native integration with leading business-intelligence platforms, Kraken will further extend the ability of organizations to gain insight into future trends affecting their business and to make decisions on those forecasts with greater certainty, maximizing their data and business intelligence investment. Big Squid makes the announcement at Domopalooza 2018.
This comes on the heels of earning an Honorable Mention from Gartner, the world’s foremost leading information technology and advisory company, in its recently released Magic Quadrant for Data Science and Machine Learning Platforms Report.
Chris Knoch
“Bringing the power of machine learning and predictive analytics into the hands of business decision makers is an exciting opportunity. We are looking forward to being able to offer customers the ability to unlock the value of their data by quickly answering forward-looking business questions and drive action at the front lines of their organizations,” said Chris Knoch, CEO of Big Squid.
He continued, “Our customers are already using their preferred BI tool to glean powerful insights from their data. When you combine that with the predictive capabilities of the Big Squid Kraken platform, the possibilities of being a fully data-driven company are endless. That means not only do all of our users have comprehensive BI at their fingertips, but they also have the predictive functionality that used to be reserved solely for data scientists. Our platform allows organizations to scale their limited data scientist resources by creating Citizen Data Scientists out of their data analyst team.”
Nick Magnuson
“We believe Gartner’s recognition of Big Squid’s Machine Learning platform truly validates Big Squid’s vision. Business decision makers want to make smarter, faster decisions using machine learning and predictive analytics,” said Nick Magnuson, Big Squid’s VP of Product. “Big Squid’s Kraken platform allows them to do this. Our platform allows data analysts to become Citizen Data Scientists, and allows businesses to scale the resources of their Data Scientists across their organization.”
The unique architecture and capabilities of Big Squid’s Kraken platform put the power of predictive analytics and machine learning into the hands of the business user and decision maker, allowing organizations to gain insight into future trends and act with greater certainty, all while leveraging existing Data & Analytics teams and technology. With Kraken, organizations can easily construct machine learning models in three easy steps, forecast key business metrics and explore different “what if” scenarios a business could take to make smarter decisions faster.


