RightMesh, BlockMesh, And Althea Partner To Found The Universal Connectivity Alliance

28 Feb 2018

Three Mesh Networking Blockchain Projects Partner To Accelerate The Deployment Of Connectivity To The Underserved
RightMesh AG announces today that they have partnered with BlockMesh and Althea to establish the Universal Connectivity Alliance (UCA). This alliance seeks to accelerate the deployment of connectivity to the nearly 4 billion people who do not have internet access today by encouraging collaboration between members, investigating interoperability opportunities, and conducting academic research.
The issue of global connectivity is a massive problem that affects more than half of the world’s population, as such, it will require the collaborative efforts of multiple parties to solve. Isolated efforts could hinder the growth of these technologies, while working together could greatly accelerate progress towards enabling connectivity for humanity as a whole. The Universal Connectivity Alliance aims to ensure every person has equal access to the socio-economic benefits enjoyed by many in developed regions with reliable access to internet and information.
Through the combination of hardware and software solutions, and working towards interoperability of connectivity solutions, the members aim to provide universal internet access through innovative mesh networking technology or other technological innovations. Initial founding members of the alliance include:
RightMesh – A decentralized, mobile mesh networking protocol and platform, using blockchain technology and tokenization, which allows apps to easily become mesh enabled to provide last mile connectivity.
BlockMesh – A decentralized platform utilizing the latest innovations in mesh networking software and custom hardware solutions that are powered by blockchain technology to create a cost-free data ecosystem which rewards its community to be a part of it.
Althea – A system enabling individuals and businesses to participate and invest in decentralized ISPs, providing higher speeds and lower prices than incumbent monopolies.
John Lyotier, CEO of RightMesh says, “The collective efforts of mesh and connectivity projects can help to accelerate deployment to the underserved, and we’re excited to explore these possibilities with BlockMesh and Althea. We look forward to also exploring how projects outside of mesh technology can be incorporated in this alliance, such as censorship resistance.”
Bjorn Guido Dingemans
Bjorn Guido Dingemans, CEO of BlockMesh says, “The Blockchain, cryptocurrencies and associated disruptive technologies will never truly be decentralized until we decentralize the communications rails they exist on. Our partnerships and founding of the Universal Connectivity Alliance is a step in the right direction by increasing access to all in the ‘global village’. We are proud to be associated with like minded endeavours that have integrity such as RightMesh and Althea.”
Jehan Tremback, CEO of Althea says, “Rightmesh and Blockmesh are our allies in the fight to take back the internet from monopolistic ISPs and oppressive governments. We’re proud to found the Universal Connectivity Alliance alongside them.”
RightMesh, (a Swiss Company in incorporation), incubated by multi-award winning parent company Left, who itself is a certified B-Corporation located in Canada, is on a mission to bring connectivity to the next billion users by multiplying the combined power of blockchain, mesh networking, and its own RMESH tokens. RightMesh wireless networks are self-forming, self-healing, and self-regulating, using various technologies in existing smartphones and IoT devices rather than relying on traditional infrastructure and Internet Service Providers. RightMesh’s networking technology is already used in a content-sharing and local messaging app called YO! which has received over 1 million installs and is actively used in emerging markets. Further applications are being developed via the RightMesh SDK, a free platform and protocol for use by others who want to build or retrofit additional mesh applications.
BlockMesh Ltd was founded in 2016 and utilizes the latest innovations in mesh networking and blockchain technology to create a cost-free data ecosystem that rewards the community to be a part of it. BlockMesh is both a hardware and software company with patent pending technology. Among other things, the patent pending hardware boosts the limited range of mobile devices from 100m up to 15 km. BlockMesh – a registered company in Mauritius – has developed a functional blockchain-based peer-to-peer ecosystem that can be used to communicate, transact, transfer data and enable the last mile of connectivity – all offline and at next to no cost.
Althea is a system developed by San Francisco-based Hawk Networks. Althea allows internet routers to pay each other for bandwidth, in an automatically competitive local bandwidth marketplace. This gives individuals and businesses the ability to come together to provide their communities with high-speed (100mb/s-1gb/s) internet access. Althea operates on the infrastructure level, creating a “decentralized ISP” which is usually faster than incumbent monopoly ISPs. Althea’s architecture enforces privacy and net-neutrality on a technical level, making it impossible for bandwidth resellers operating within an Althea network to spy on traffic, or throttle specific types of traffic. Althea is currently being deployed in communities in the United States and around the world.


