Linc Global Named Best AI Solution For Customer Service

28 Jun 2018

Linc Global, the Customer Care Automation platform used by leading customer-centric brands, today announced it has been selected as the winner of the Best AI Solution for Customer Service for the 2018 Artificial Intelligence Breakthrough Awards. The award recognizes the best companies, technologies, products and services throughout various categories of artificial intelligence, including machine learning, vertical applications, smart robotics and many more.
“We are thrilled to be recognized as the Best AI Solution for Customer Service by the AI Breakthrough Awards program”
Follow Us
Among 2,500 award applicants, Linc was selected for its innovative work in helping brands and retailers reinvent their customer care strategy. Linc’s platform leverages purpose-built AI to answer more than 90% of customer inquiries with automated assistance across web, email, SMS, Facebook Messenger, and voice assistants including Google Assistant and Amazon Alexa.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
Through Linc’s commerce-specialized automation software, retailers and brands can reinvent customer care, become more customer-centric and adapt to changing consumer behavior and expectations, helping them compete and thrive in the era of Amazon and convenience-commerce. As noted in a study conducted by Brand Garage and Linc, 87% of retailers plan to increase their use of AI in customer service, and 44% will use a conversational commerce interface in the next 24 months as they seek AI-powered solutions to improve customer service and engagement. With Linc’s offering, brands are able to blend service, marketing and sales in real-time to improve customer satisfaction, cut service costs, increase retention and purchase frequency.
Read More: Think Next: Microsoft For Startups China Enables Chinese Innovations To “Go Global” And Overseas Innovations To “Go China”
Fang Cheng
“We are thrilled to be recognized as the Best AI Solution for Customer Service by the AI Breakthrough Awards program,” said Fang Cheng, CEO, Linc Global. “AI continues to make its way into the retail industry as consumers embrace new methods of shopping and communicating with retailers and brands. Linc is helping retailers and brands take advantage by creating a customer care environment that provides a superior experience and real-time communication.”
With this award, Linc joins the ranks of Google, Qualcomm, NVIDIA and IBM, among several other innovative companies, for its current work in customer care automation.
Read More: Quanergy Solid State LiDAR Wins Juniper Research Top Automotive Award


