Sutter Health Collaborates With Qventus To Drive Down Pharmaceutical Costs

01 Sep 2017

AI-based Platform to Improve Patient Experience, Enhance Pharmacy Operations
The not-for-profit Sutter Health network announced today that it will collaborate with Qventus to use the company’s artificial intelligence (AI) platform to enhance inpatient pharmacy operations across its healthcare system. The real-time platform will help Sutter Health reduce inpatient drug spending and support clinical teams by improving the effectiveness of pharmacy workflows and quality practices.
“Leveraging AI and analytics will help us deliver safer, more affordable care for our patients,” said Sameer Badlani, MD, FACP, vice president and chief health information officer for Sutter Health. “We’ve built a reputation for transforming healthcare, always thinking ahead, learning and innovating. This collaboration is another next step to help those we serve achieve their best health.”
Pharmacy operations is a growing opportunity for hospitals. More than 90 percent of hospital leaders report that price hikes for inpatient drugs have had a moderate or severe effect on managing overall costs. Additionally, hospital pharmacists understand the need to balance personalized service with increasing patient volumes. Clinicians have the added challenge of managing and monitoring lots of pharmaceutical usage data across disparate systems.
The Qventus platform brings together hospital, patient and pharmacy data in real-time to determine immediate opportunities where a pharmacist-led intervention may be needed to ensure that patients receive the most appropriate medications for their treatment. The system identifies patients who may require additional attention and nudges the physician, clinical team and pharmacist to take needed actions. It also directs pharmacists to prioritize the neediest patients for consultation and drug education at discharge to improve patient understanding of their medication regimen, reduce errors and increase compliance.
“Applying Qventus’ artificial intelligence to our pharmaceutical operations allows us to identify areas of improvement while keeping the focus on those in our care,” said Ryan Stice, PharmD, executive director of Pharmacy at Sutter Health. “This platform can help our care teams have more meaningful conversations with our patients—helping explain care plans in ways they understand and ensure they feel supported.”
“We are inspired by Sutter’s drive to innovate new ways of tackling inefficiencies in today’s complex healthcare system,” said Mudit Garg, CEO of Qventus. “By applying AI to pharmaceutical operations, we’ll be able to help hospitals make better decisions for their patients. Ultimately, this doesn’t just result in financial benefits, but will create a profound impact on patient care.”
Initially, the platform will launch at four strategically chosen hospital sites within the health system’s network, then quickly roll out to 26 additional sites.


