Sixa Lets You Rent A Cloud-Based PC Built On The Blockchain Via Mobile App

05 Apr 2018

First Ever Decentralized Computer Gives Anyone Access To Unparalleled Computer Power
Sixa, a startup that originally set out to free the PC and move computing to the cloud with low-latency virtual computers geared toward gamers, developers, and designers, is excited to announce the launch of a completely revamped business and app built on the blockchain.
Sixa, a YCombinator grad, has overhauled its original service and model to launch a decentralized computer for everyone. There are two types of Sixa users who can:
Rent Out Your PC: Earn money by renting your computer power / software to another person anywhere in the world
Rent Someone Else’s PC: Use someone else’s computer to use specific software or feature
To provide the processing power a user needs, the Sixa app finds the closest and most appropriate computers on the network to able to deliver the computing resources with a much greater geographical coverage and a dramatically lower price than traditional cloud services. Renting Sixa computers might not only allow users (gamers, developers, designers) to save money, but could also give access to users who couldn’t previously afford it.
Mykola Minchenko
‘The world is entering a new phase of decentralized computing via a distributed cloud. Sixa aims to make this peer-to-peer collaboration possible on a massive scale’, explains Sixa CEO, Mykola Minchenko. ‘With 30k+ active users, we saw a massive need to transition our service to the blockchain. This change not only represents the blockchain phenomenon, but a truly fair and even playing field for anyone to access powerful computers.’
With blockchain technology, there is zero need for data centers or a physical footprint. Before the blockchain overhaul, Sixa used Amazon servers. These servers allowed Sixa to launch fully and successfully in the US / Europe – however, unable to reach other regions because of limited signals. Since this moment, Sixa has become equally available in any region and the development of its computing powers depends solely on the capabilities of PC-users on Sixa.
The success of a decentralized computer for everyone is based not solely on usability and data security but also its economic benefits. Virtual computers are solving the massive problem around global access and scalability. Moving to blockchain will allow Sixa to reach the colossal market of PC-gamers (900MM+ people).
Sixa on blockchain taps into a massive power source: crypro-miners in Europe / US.  This community is eager to make money by sharing their PC. On the Sixa app, miners can lease their PC to users who want to play modern games for much more than the traditional $0.14 / hour. At the same time, gamers will be attracted by the low prices available on Sixa.
Sixa will reward miners for providing virtual desktops to users around the world; that’s the proposition of Sixa. The blockchain tech will prove to be a great enabler for decentralized software and computer processing and hopefully change the way we use computers.
Sixa is a cloud-computing startup that gives users on-demand access to personal virtual computers. Sixa is a Y Combinator graduate with a mission to ‘free the PC’ and shift computer processing to the cloud. Sixa offers virtual computers with various capabilities specifically focused on developers, gamers, and designers, and more.


