Aeris Wins 2018 Frost & Sullivan India ICT Award For “IoT Platform Vendor Of The Year”

03 Jul 2018

Aeris, a technology leader in the Internet of Things (IoT), today announced it has been awarded the “IoT Platform Vendor of the Year” award for 2018 by Frost & Sullivan.
Aeris is being recognised for its outstanding effort and achievement in enabling its customers to attain their business transformation, customer experience and growth goals through its innovative Aeris® IoT platform. The robust, scalable and innovative IoT platform from Aeris has been serving as the cornerstone for diverse IoT projects across the world. In the last two years, the Aeris platform has been gathering traction in the Indian market with projects as diverse as mobility, logistics, connected vehicles, smart cities and smart manufacturing.
Follow Us
This recognition is part of the Frost & Sullivan India ICT Awards. Now in its 16th consecutive year, the awards honour and recognize companies and individuals who have pushed the boundaries of excellence — rising above the competition and achieving landmarks to deliver business outcomes using Digital and Disruptive technologies in the Indian market. The award jury included reputed business and technology stalwarts from the industry who selected the award winners based on a structured, metrics-based evaluation process.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
The number of ‘connected things’ continues to grow with key initiatives from the Government of India, such as the Smart Cities Mission, the Make in India campaign, Digital India and the Start Up India. In addition, the industrial corridors are creating tremendous opportunities for the development of an IoT ecosystem.
The 2018 India ICT awards banquet was held on June 21, 2018 at Le Meridien in New Delhi.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc
Supporting Quotes
Benoy CS, Director & Business Unit Head, Digital Transformation Practice, Frost & Sullivan: “The IoT ecosystem and supporting technologies are leading the drive towards digital transformation, enabling growth through the strengthening of current business models and the creation of new offerings, services and products. Organizations have now started to realize the significance of having a connected eco-system for its work operations to gain cost, efficiency and productivity benefits.”
Dr. Rishi Bhatnagar, President, Aeris India: “IoT creates a data-centric, self-optimising world. Indian enterprises have realized the value of digitization of their value chain and processes with IoT, further extending their reach with vertical-specific, segmented oriented analytics, delivering key competitive advantage. The Aeris IoT platform provides state-of-the-art integrated solution that helps enterprises address the challenge of managing and analyzing their connected assets while reducing the complexity of IoT deployment and optimization for cost and performance. Our team is constantly striving to create innovative IoT solutions across industries, and this award further solidifies Aeris’ position as the leader in the IoT platform market in India.”
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance


