ETS Announces Smart Building AI Platform Roll-Out

23 Mar 2018

Platform Uses Artificial Intelligence To Reduce Mixed-Use Properties’ Energy And Operating Costs, And Generate Additional Revenue From Onsite Mechanical Assets
ETS (Energy Technology Savings), the energy technology, behavior management, and smart building services provider, today announced the rollout of its Smart Building AI Platform, further enhancing the first predictive analytics and behavior modification mobile software suite that empowers the building management community with real time mobile tools to proactively reduce energy and operating costs, and generate revenue from onsite mechanical assets.
Jeff Hendler
“By harnessing the power of artificial intelligence, this innovative platform can now teach buildings how to be predictively more energy conscious,” said ETS CEO Jeff Hendler, who services some of the biggest developers and landlords on the East Coast. “With these mobile tools in hand, combined with our training program and Smart Building Concierge Service, our clients’ achievements in energy savings, sustainability and resiliency will be the highest yet. Our platform allows property managers to change energy behavior in the building at different times during the day, which will have a dramatic impact on energy costs.”
The ETS Smart Building Concierge team will be conducting Spring 2018 demand management training with each individual building operations group and management executives. As part of the Spring Training program, ETS will be rolling out and empowering property management with the company’s Smart Building AI Platform across ETS’ growing portfolio of large multifamily and mixed-use properties.
The ETS Smart Building AI Platform – continuously learns from each building’s specific real time data to generate predictive analytics that guide energy management behavior modification. The new generation mobile software suite empowers the building management community with the essential mobile tools to proactively reduce operating costs and generate revenue from onsite mechanical assets.
The design and functionality of the new software, App and platform is largely based on user feedback ETS has collected from building operators over the last two years.
“Acknowledging the operations team at each building for driving energy efficiency, work-flow productivity, and enhancing resident comfort has been paramount to the success of our data driven platform,” said ETS’ Seth Reisman, SVP Concierge Services. “Training and empowering our property management operators with real-time digital demand management protocols and fault detection anomaly notifications continuously generate incredible value for our property owners.  Our Smart Building AI Platform has taken that value to a higher level creating the social visibility rewarding each staff member the deserved recognition for responding and taking action to opportunities identified by our platform to reduce costs and generate revenue.”
The new platform simplifies each user’s building management experience with powerful Big Data insights from smart meters and IoT sensors that cut energy costs and generate revenue from demand management programs. The mobile interface rewards staff engagement and verifies app utilization.
Some important features include:
Empowers staff to perform energy savings activities with guided digital demand management protocol checklists, linking positive actions to efficiency goals and rewards
Provides collaborative and transparent tools to handle faults (lobby too hot, emergency door open, higher than forecast energy use, Distributive Energy Resource – CHP, Battery, Solar – unit offline, Domestic Hot Water temps below average) quickly and improve tenant comfort
Creates visible real time accountability for building staff through verification of engagement
Gamifies energy and operations property management experience
ETS is a first mover technology company digitizing large multifamily and mixed-use properties – – developing smart meter and IoT data ontologies that power Deep Learning and AI semantics that are linked to specific property management activities that significantly lower energy costs, improve work flow productivity, and extract new revenue streams from existing property assets.
The company is currently serving more than 60 million square feet of major multifamily and mixed-use properties in the Northeast and expanding California and Seattle in 2018. ETS is taking a major step forward enhancing its state of the art services for current clients and scaling its capacities for expansive growth.
ETS is an energy technology, behavior management, and smart building services provider. Integration of our products and services in large multi-family and mixed-use properties materially reduces energy expenditures, enables Wi-Fi connectivity, improves building operations and increases Net Operating Income and Net Asset Value.


