Business Professionals: Go Beyond The Hype And Learn How Artificial Intelligence Is Creating Tremendous Business Opportunities At Accelerate AI In San Francisco

31 Oct 2017

This Upcoming Event Was Created to Bridge the Gap between AI and Business Professionals, to Offer a Better Understanding as to How This Technology Can Improve Businesses in Ways They Never Thought Possible
Artificial Intelligence and data science continue companies to a new tipping point as it begins to touch every aspect of business. Just as tech has transformed many industries and rendered others obsolete, artificial intelligence and data science will be even more transformative.
Traditional sources of information, married with data lakes and new modeling techniques in machine learning, deep learning and artificial intelligence are creating tremendous new opportunities across industries including marketing, finance, healthcare, education, government, retail, insurance and many more.
The harsh reality is that companies who adapt will thrive and those who lag behind risk fading into obscurity.
To discuss these challenges and opportunities, ODSC is hosting an exclusive executive event to bring together thought leaders from the business community to meet data science and AI innovators. Accelerate AI – The ODSC Business Summit will be hosted at the Hyatt Regency San Francisco Airport Hotel on Nov. 2-4.
Here attendees will have a chance to explore the business opportunities and challenges related to AI and data science.
Accelerate AI is co-located with the Open Data Science Conference (ODSC) West, one of the largest applied AI and data science conferences in the world. The summit will bring together top industry professionals and CxOs to help attendees better understand how AI and data science are transforming their business including.
Learn how AI and Data Science techniques are creating exciting new business opportunities and prepare your company for the next wave of innovation by learning how to leverage deep learning, machine learning, sentiment analysis, predictive analytics and many other topics
Full details of the event are listed available on the Accelerate AI website. Also, for those looking to get a jump start on their AI learning prior to the event and future proof their careers can visit: learnai.odsc.com to access free data science and AI training videos.


