Micro Focus Introduces Vertica 9

24 Oct 2017

Unified Advanced Analytics Database Features Advancements In In-Database Machine Learning, Direct Querying Of Parquet Data On AWS S3, Support For Google Cloud Platform And Azure Power BI, And Beta Release Of Cloud Optimized Separation Of Compute And Storage
Micro Focus announced a major release of its Vertica Analytics Platform. Vertica 9 introduces an extended list of in-database Machine Learning capabilities – including new algorithms, model replication, data preparation functions, and continuous end-to-end workflow – to simplify the production and deployment of machine learning models. In addition, Vertica 9 will be available for deployment in the Google Marketplace and has further integration with Microsoft Azure including Power BI certification. With Vertica 9, organizations can now analyze their data not only in place, but now in the right place – without data movement – while supporting any major cloud deployment for fast and reliable read and write for multiple data formats.
Micro Focus also announced the beta release of Vertica in Eon Mode, which enables organizations to evaluate the separation of compute and storage for Amazon Web Services (AWS) deployments. Companies in the AWS ecosystem will be able to leverage AWS S3 for storage and Vertica’s query-optimized analytics engine for processing speed to capitalize on cloud economics.
Legacy data warehouse solutions have forced many enterprises into rigid and high-cost proprietary hardware and analytics solutions supporting only limited data formats. As data formats and storage locations continuously evolve, organizations require a powerful and unified solution to analyze data in the right place at the right time, with the performance and economics that the business requires.
“Data is one of the most valuable assets for companies, and a company’s ability to monetize their data while optimizing for both cost and performance at scale is already a fundamental differentiator in every industry,” said Colin Mahony, Senior Vice President and General Manager, Vertica, Micro Focus. “Vertica’s ability to analyze an extensive set of data formats in the right place, at the right time, enables our customers to optimize for both cloud economics and user demands. Vertica is the only platform in the industry that can provide high-performance advanced analytics and in-database machine learning with true freedom from underlying infrastructure across the full data pipeline, at the scale demanded by the world’s most data-driven organizations.”
Vertica 9: Delivering High-Performance In-Database Machine Learning and Advanced Analytics Anywhere, Anytime, on Any Major Cloud
Critical to Micro Focus providing customers with enterprise-grade scalable software with analytics built in, Vertica provides organizations with a single, unified analytical database that supports all major cloud platforms, all popular data formats, enhanced integrations with Spark and Kafka and an analyze-in-place, unified architecture that enables businesses to monetize their data assets with cloud elasticity – regardless of data location. Organizations can use Vertica 9’s flexible and expanded deployment options across on-premise, private, and public clouds, and on Hadoop and AWS S3 data lakes, to adopt a best-fit analytical solution. This affords them the broadest choices on where, how, and when they run analytics – supported by new provisioning and administrative UIs built specifically for the cloud.
“Fidelis has the first and only purpose-built, automated detection and response platform that delivers 10-20x efficiency for security operations teams. Our unwavering goal is to automate cyber defense action with intelligence – and Machine Learning for predictive analytics is the key,” said Abhishek Sharma, Data Scientist at Fidelis Cybersecurity. “Vertica’s new in-database machine learning capabilities are like gold! We are extremely excited to train our Machine Learning models on our data in Vertica and ship them with our platform to run on our customers’ clusters. This is something that is much harder with any other tool. Vertica’s in-database machine learning will improve our ability to offer new predictive analytics features quickly and easily to our growing customer base. It will improve our competitive positioning.”


