Artos And Aigo.ai Announce Partnership To Marry Blockchain And AI

12 Jul 2018

Aigo.ai and Artos.io today announced a strategic relationship combining AI and blockchain technologies to integrate Aigo’s voice assistant capabilities into Artos’s ticket wallet service, which can be integrated into existing ticketing software or provided to clients as a white label app.
While users are within the ticket wallet, Aigo will be able to assist by offering personalized recommendations for events and concerts coming up in their area, offering users a curated experience and giving Artos clients an increased opportunity for cross-selling tickets. The assistant may also be used to guide first-time users through the process of using the wallet, acting as first line-of-contact for customer support.
Aigo adds to a key set of capabilities that Artos offers ticketing organizations via their blockchain-based services. Working with ticketing agencies and ticketing software providers, Artos leverages the Aventus Protocol open ticketing standard, built on Ethereum, to ensure existing apps become blockchain-ready and create new complementary apps and services. One example includes Artos’s white label ticket wallet, an intuitive user-interface designed to allow consumers to purchase tickets that are held on the blockchain.
Follow Us
Peter Voss
“We’re excited to partner with Artos and combine their industry-leading open-source protocol for ticketing with the ease of using the Aigo personal assistant for users across the ticketing supply chain,” says Peter Voss, Chief Scientist at Aigo.ai. “With significantly greater cognitive ability than today’s assistant and our shared focus on bringing the best-possible experience, we see Aigo as the perfect guide to realize the strengths of the Aventus blockchain ecosystem.”
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
Alan Vey
“The Aigo personal assistant is the perfect complement to Artos’ blockchain-based ticket wallet,” says Alan Vey, co-founder of Artos, “As a next-generation smart AI assistant, Aigo will adapt and personalize to the consumer to streamline the ticket purchasing and selling process, as well as recommending and cross-selling curated events. We expect a rapid expansion of the Aventus Protocol ecosystem, and ticket buyers, ticket agents and event organizers who work with Artos to leverage the blockchain will find Aigo a complementary and personalized method for bringing the right tickets, at the right price, to fans across the world.”
Artos founders Alan Vey and Annika Monari, who met while studying at Imperial College London, have a long-term interest both in blockchain and in cognitive-learning solutions. Alan’s master’s degree was on Artificial Intelligence with a focus on statistical and logical machine-learning, with his thesis focusing on blockchain-based film rights distribution. During Annika’s studies, she developed machine-learning facial recognition technology that enabled the identification of emotions with over 90% accuracy and focused in her thesis on the application of machine-learning in particle physics.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections


