Epson Robots To Demonstrate Innovative And Highly Efficient Robotics Solutions For The Factory Automation Industry At ATX East

12 Jun 2018

Epson Robots Will Be Showcasing Unique, Innovative, High Precision Robotics Solutions Designed For Maximum Efficiency And Productivity For A Wide Variety Of Applications In Factory Automation At The Automation Technology Show, ATX East  
One of its key robots, the Flexion N2, will be shown at the ATC Automation partner booth.
The new Synthis T3 All-in-One SCARA robot comes with a built-in controller, a new technology feature that is designed to reduce space requirements and simplify setup at an ultra-low cost. It offers an easy-to-install and fast integration solution perfect for simple applications such as pick and place, assembly, parts handling and dispensing. It is ideal for customers looking to automate their factory without using complex slide-based solutions.
The C4 6-Axis robot with Force Guidance is a small, yet powerful robot with high repeatability and fast cycle times. It is ideal for demanding applications requiring 6-Axis dexterity. Featuring a unique compact wrist for efficient motion in tight spaces and a slim body elbow design for optimum workcell layout, this robot has a wide range of motion, so parts can be accessed from virtually any angle. Integrated Force Guidance helps drive placement precision to even higher levels. The robot is able to “feel” its way into areas with high precision placement requirements.
Read More: How Your Small Business Can Tackle GDPR And Comply Today
ATC Automation Showcase: Booth #2417 
ATC Automation is a provider of custom automated assembly and test equipment for a variety of industries. The company will be showcasing Epson’s Flexion N2 6-Axis Robot, which features the world’s first patented compact folding arm design that is changing the scope of robot-based automation. Unlike any other 6-Axis robot on the market, it features a unique tight space motion capability.
When: ATX East takes place from June 12-14.
Where: Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, New York, NY.
Epson Robots is a global leader in PC controlled precision factory automation, with an installed base of well over 65,000 robots worldwide and a product line of hundreds of models of easy to use SCARA, Cartesian and 6-Axis robots based on a common PC based platform. Building on a 35+-year heritage, Epson Robots today delivers robots for precision assembly and material handling applications in the aerospace, appliance, automotive, biotechnology, consumer product, electronics, food processing, medical device, pharmaceutical, plastics, semiconductor, and telecommunication industries.
Read More: Do You Have A Response Plan In Case Of A Data Breach Under GDPR?


