Savant Software Extends Its Relationship With Clovity’s IoT And Cloud Practice

25 May 2018

Clovity Delivered Savant Software’s Platform Helping its Retail, Manufacturing, Industrial, and Healthcare Clients Lower Cost of Operations and Higher Efficiencies Through Cloud & SaaS Offerings
Clovity, an industry-recognized end-to-end IoT solution provider, the creator of CSensorNet and CDatainsights, who is leading the designing and building of intelligent solutions, announced that Savant Software, one of the leading enterprise Supply Chain and solutions company, has extended its relationship with Clovity’s IoT and Cloud practice through delivery and support for of all of Savant’s Cloud and SaaS offerings worldwide.
Clovity is working alongside Savant’s digital teams, combining devices (connected warehouse), RFIDs, Asset Tags, Data, Cloud, Digital technologies and creativity to stay ahead of the customer experiences when it comes to the Supply Chain by leveraging the fast-changing warehouse management environment. Clovity’s tailored solutions based on innovative technologies, automated processes and efficient operations, provides comprehensive support service, covering all digital and cloud platforms and thereby delivering customer-centric Connected Supply Chain solutions across Retail, Industrials, Manufacturing, Technology Hardware client base including Ajinomoto, Arizona Ice Tea, Sierra Nevada Brewing, Foland Group, etc.
Targeted benefits include lower capital and operational costs, reduced risk to people and assets, and enhanced operational performance.
As part of the project, Clovity designed, developed and implemented the digital lifecycle asset management system, based on the internet of things (IoT), Big Data, Cloud and mobile technologies. The system connects, integrates and analyzes data from numerous points – such as individual merchandise, boxes, pallets, shelves, racks, relays and other assets – across their full life cycle.
Today’s warehouse workers use mobile and various handheld devices to communicate with Connected Devices and RFID tags fixed to merchandise and other assets for any operation which collects large amounts of operational data. Applications developed by Clovity in collaboration with Savant support this process and focus on several key areas, including supplies receipt and distribution, infrastructure, equipment, and asset/merchandise verification. Clovity also aided Savant to move these applications from a traditional on-prem model to a Cloud environment.
In a typical back office set-up, the data thus collected is now analyzed through an IoT-based platform, CSensorNet, developed by Clovity, that uses advanced predictive analytics to generate insights, enabling real-time performance matrices to improve productivity.
Diane Cawley
“We are very happy to be working with Clovity to implement this new digital Supply Chain solution, and we’re confident it will not only help us achieve significant maintenance cost savings for our enterprise customers, but also boost performance to enable us to better serve our customers,” said Diane Cawley, Chief Technology Officer of Savant Software. “We continue to work with Clovity because of their thought leadership in end-to-end IoT, Data and Cloud solutions that helps us provide better service quality, stability and features, driven by improved operational performance to our customers.”
Gaurav Mohan, Sr. Vice President at Clovity and client account lead for Savant, said, “This project is helping Savant take advantage of technological advancements to lead Savant to become a powerhouse when it comes to Supply Chain across a diverse customer base, and will fundamentally transform how Savant manages quick implementation, robust performance, enabling real-time decision making based on predictive insights for its enterprise customer base”
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Powerful Women In The Tech World
Clovity was selected by Savant for its industry experience, expertise in successfully delivering enterprise IoT, Cloud and Big Data technology programs globally, and an innovation-led approach.
Clovity’s technology and teams are helping Fortune 500 enterprises and high growth mid-market technology enterprises with fully integrated device-to-cloud-to-enterprise integration solutions with the outcome to simplify building your Internet of Things (IoT), Data, Cloud & Digital platforms to power tomorrow’s Enterprise world.
Clovity’s cognitive strength lies in the amalgamation of two powerful ideas – collaboration and transformity.
Clovity emphasizes on combining thought leadership, innovation and passion for technology together to achieve successful transformation and ‘disruptive solutions’ for Banking Finance, Healthcare and Retail industries that are IoT, Cloud, Consumerization and Big Data’ focused.
Clovity’s commitment to innovation has led to many Plug and Play solutions and frameworks in IoT (CSensorNet), Predictive Analytics (CDataInsights), DevOps, Mobility etc. that enables customers for faster time to market product launches.
Clovity underpins its solutions with ‘deep Agile expertise’ by leveraging its Agile Framework: Synthesis in every aspect of customer journey to ensure complete collaboration and transparency. Clovity’s key is to work in absolute synchrony with customers to deliver solutions and projects to create scalable technology foundation and architecture for all future advancements.
Savant Software, Inc. is a leading provider of Cloud and SaaS-based supply chain solutions for small, mid-market, and enterprise distributors and manufacturers. Our products include a small business WMS, enterprise WMS, farm to fork distribution, shipping manifest, container tracking, truck route management and more. Savant’s supply chain solutions are scalable, modular and designed to fit every budget. Savant supports cloud and on-prem pricing models. Many of today’s leading ERP applications integrate seamlessly into Savant’s supply chain solutions.
Read More: How Do You Close The Diversity Gap In Technology Companies?


