Welltok Ranks On Inc. 5000 Fastest-Growing Private Company List For 3rd Consecutive Year

16 Aug 2017

Company moves up to #278 with a 1,576% Growth Rate
Welltok, the leading consumer health enterprise Software as a Service company, is among the top 5 percent of the nation’s fastest growing private companies on Inc. magazine’s 36th annual list. The company ranked #278 in its third consecutive recognition on the prestigious Inc. 5000 list. Welltok also ranked 6thamong Colorado companies and 19th among health companies.
“It is a great honor to be ranked highly on the list three years in a row, and the ranking speaks to the importance of our mission of empowering and enabling individuals to become engaged health consumers,” said Jeff Margolis, chairman and CEO for Welltok. “Our success is largely attributed to our innovative clients embracing the need for an enterprise-level platform that systematically connects consumers with the resources and tools that help them achieve optimal health.”
Welltok has generated national recognition and built an impressive client roster by developing the health industry’s leading consumer enterprise platform. The company’s health optimization platform organizes the growing spectrum of health-related programs and resources into a unified, highly personalized experience for consumers while also helping population health managers improve operational efficiencies, maximize revenue and drive greater healthcare value.
Additionally, the company’s technology-enabled service offerings effectively target and engage consumers to achieve client-specific business objectives ranging from closing gaps in care to acquiring new members. These services include Welltok Analytics Services, which leverage advanced analytics to provide actionable consumer insights in order to identify and target consumer needs and impactability; and Welltok Engagement Services, formerly Silverlink Communications, which develops and delivers engaging communications across all channels (text, email, IVR, mail and more) based on consumer preferences and goals.
Company milestones contributing to its growth trajectory, include:
Expansion and diversification of its client base to include health plans, government programs (Medicare and Medicaid), large employers, providers, health and wellness organizations and retail pharmacy
Launch of several new product offerings including SMARTReach, which combines its unparalleled analytics and communications capabilities; and the Virtual Benefit Agent, powered by IBM Watson, which is an artificial intelligence-powered chatbot that provides on-demand and personalized answers to questions about benefits and healthcare costs
Continued expansion of Welltok’s proprietary consumer database to include 275 million Americans and 1,600 variables such as income, household composition, purchasing habits and voting records
Strategic partnerships with TeleTech, HealthFitness and IBM Watson to create combined high- and low-touch solutions to seamlessly serve the needs of both population health managers and consumers
Inc. 5000 is the most prestigious ranking of the nation’s fastest-growing private companies and the 2017 honorees are being hailed as the “most competitive crop in the list’s history.” The list represents a unique look at the most successful companies in America. Welltok was ranked high thanks to an impressive three-year growth rate of 1,576%, compared to the list average of 481%.


