Thunderhead Introduces Intent Analyzer: Unrivalled Customer Journey Intelligence Powered By AI

21 Mar 2018

Thunderhead, the global leader in customer engagement and journey orchestration, announces Intent Analyzer,enabling brands to move beyond customer journey visualizations to uncover an even deeper level of actionable journey intelligence.
Intent Analyzer gives CMOs and CX leaders a richer understanding of customer intent based on a more complex analysis of journey behavior, further enhancing journey orchestration to drive topline growth, reduce cost-to-serve and build customer lifetime value.
Representing the next wave in Thunderhead’s pioneering work visualizing and personalizing customer journeys in real-time, Intent Analyzer allows business users to easily anticipate customers behaviour by leveraging proprietary Machine Learning algorithms and visualizations to automate the analysis of billions of customer journey touch-point events. It is an on-demand approach that combines the latest thinking with simplicity, and eliminates the need for costly and time-consuming customer data analysis projects.
Intent Analyzer identifies key opportunities for orchestration, empowering CX and marketing professionals to evaluate proposed journey designs against the customer journeys expected based on its analysis. Using marketing orientated query language, Intent Analyzer gives business users the means to uncover new layers of highly valuable context and behaviour,
Glen Manchester
“In today’s connected digital economy, it’s critical for brands to move beyond the rear-view mirror world of traditional digital marketing and be proactive in their ability to anticipate the real needs of their customers.” said Glen Manchester, CEO and Founder, Thunderhead. “Our real-time journey visualization has been a step change for CMOs in their mission to deliver seamless customer engagement. Our latest pioneering innovation, Intent Analyzer, enables brands to move beyond customer journey visualizations to uncover a deeper level of actionable journey intelligence, making it possible for CMOs and CX leaders to accelerate the delivery of customer-centric digital transformation at scale. Our mission has been to fulfil the vision of CRM to deliver seamless customer relationships but adapt it for today’s real-time always connected omnichannel world.”


