Yroo Unveils New Deal AI To Help Shoppers Find The Best-Value Products

18 Mar 2018

Shopping Meta-Search Platform Yroo Applies Artificial Intelligence to Its AI Deal Catalog of over 150 Million Products
Yroo, a leading and powerful meta-search shopping platform, announces the launch of a new feature called Deal AI™ that pushes notifications to shoppers when the prices of popular products drop to historically attractive levels.
Deal AI sends customized daily notifications to our users showcasing the most attractive buying opportunities, the retailers offering them, and the true discount from typical prices.
At the time of this announcement, James Cunningham, CEO of Yroo, said, “The average consumer is exposed to thousands of ads every day and sifting through all the noise to identify true deals in the market is challenging.  Prices can fluctuate significantly over time and advertised discounts are often not as attractive as they appear.”
James added, “Deal AI empowers shoppers by informing them of unique, one-time buying opportunities on products that are relevant to them.”
Deal AI makes use of Yroo’s AI technology and growing database to identify compelling deals in the E-commerce market.  Yroo has contracts with more than 5,000 merchant partners who provide us continuous data on over 150 million products, making our catalog the largest of any meta-search engine.
With comprehensive pricing information dating back as far as several years, we can instantly spot prices that are significantly below historic levels.  
The beta version of Deal AI was very popular with Yroo customers, who appreciated the opportunity to take advantage of exceptional price discounts.  Yroo’s merchant partners have also benefited from the click-through traffic directed towards specific products they are promoting, as well as conversion rates that are nearly double the industry average.
Read More: Convey Launches Platform to Replace Static Contacts with Live, Dynamic Connections
Currently, Yroo uses AI to empower shoppers to discover, research and buy from the largest collection of products and retailers available anywhere.  We help shoppers find the best value in the market, whether they are online or in-store, by comparing current and historical prices across thousands of merchants.  We connect consumers with the merchants who can best meet their needs while providing merchants with unprecedented insights into shopper’s behavior.


