Thoughtonomy Partners With Codebase8

13 Apr 2018

Fast Growth Intelligent Automation Leader Drives Continued Global Growth
Thoughtonomy, the Intelligent Automation Company, has announced a new partnership with Codebase8.
Codebase8, who has worked with over 65% of the UK’s top FTSE 200 companies, will make Virtual Workers available as a Managed Service to clients in financial services, health, retail, and energy sectors. As experts in a range of technical and commercial services from modern AI and robotic automation solutions through to legacy application support and migration services, Codebase8’s provision of Virtual Workers will only serve to strengthen their services offering.
Thoughtonomy recently announced a new Partner Program designed to recruit a significant number of new partners to support the continued expansion of the business, both in the UK and internationally. Thoughtonomy’s strategic growth plan is focused on increasing its channel business from around 45% of current transactions to over 90% within the next 12 months.
Terry Walby
“We’ve grown our partner network by 20% since the start of the year and as a hyper-growth company in an innovative market we are keen to partner with companies such as Codebase8 who recognise the benefits of Intelligent Automation. We need the right partners to help us scale across the globe”, said Terry Walby, CEO and Founder Thoughtonomy.
Commenting on the announcement, Liz Callaghan the Managing Director of Codebase8, explains, “Automation is a natural extension to our application development, modernisation and support portfolio. We partner with our Customers to deliver greater efficiency, enhanced productivity and improved information to influence and drive business success. By harnessing the power of intelligent automation as a layer within our business solutions we are able to accelerate digital transformation with a focus on delivering greater return on investment for our Customers.”
This news comes after a period of impressive growth; UK based Thoughtonomy has consistently reported Year on Year growth over 300%, with growth of 316% reported in 2017. Last year the company expanded internationally with offices in New York and Austin and earlier this year, established an R&D hub in Manchester, UK.
Thoughtonomy was founded in the UK in 2013 and now works with over 150 clients in 27 countries and has offices in London and Manchester in the UK, New York and Austin in the US.
Thoughtonomy’s technology combines the principles of Cloud Computing, Software Robotics and Artificial Intelligence to provide a platform for the digitization and automation of office work. Once taught, Virtual Workers simulate the actions of a human worker – using and interacting with business applications without any changes to those applications. The Workers use information to make the same decisions as a person would, and after being taught a process, can execute it without error, 24 hours a day and at machine speed. And as they do, they learn, and use that learning to continually improve and optimize their work.


