Apptio Introduces Machine Learning And Intelligent Analytics To Automate And Simplify TBM Across U.S. Federal Agencies

13 Jul 2018

New EA Program Enables Federal CIOs To Quickly Adopt Technology Business Management (TBM)
Today, Apptio, Inc. (NASDAQ: APTI) is proud to announce an early adopter (EA) program for new machine learning capabilities designed to lower the barrier to adoption for TBM in the public sector. Participants in this program will benefit from recent product innovation that automatically maps technology costs from financial systems (like the general ledger and vendor invoices) to the Apptio TBM Unified Model (ATUM). This program eases adoption of TBM from weeks to days, allowing agencies to gain granular visibility into IT spending to quickly make informed decisions.
Combined, agency CIOs will now have the benefit of truly innovative technologies designed to automate arduous tasks and free up time to focus on mission-critical activities. According to Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Federal agencies spend upwards of $90 billion annually on technology, much without strict oversight or management. As a result, the President’s Management Agenda has identified the improvement of Federal IT Spend Transparency as one of 12 cross-agency priorities. Further, this agenda seeks to adopt TBM government-wide by 2022.
Follow Us
Apptio has a robust data and analytics platform designed to automate TBM and the advanced capabilities introduced today will lower the time and resource commitment needed to adopt and see value from TBM. Apptio’s platform ingests, aggregates and analyzes technology costs from readily-available sources across IT, finance and vendors from structured or semi-structured formats. Machine learning capabilities will now automatically map these data to the industry-standard TBM Taxonomy “cost pool” level. With the unique ability to learn and recognize similar data sets over time, users can input new forms of data and automatically match them to existing cost categories. Historically, this process takes anywhere from weeks to months.
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
Sunny Gupta
“Bolstered with the experience gained from more than a decade of TBM deployments, Apptio is the industry-leader in TBM cost mapping and the leading provider capable of meeting the demand for cost analytics in the U.S. federal government,” said Sunny Gupta, CEO of Apptio. “Scrutiny on IT spending is increasing as pressure to modernize through cloud computing, agile design and a digital-first mindset rise, and we are committed to supporting technology and finance leaders across the public sector.”
Apptio received its FedRAMP Certification  in April of 2018 and is already working with many federal agencies, including the General Services Administration (GSA), OMB, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Department of Justice’s Executive Office for Immigration Review (DOJ – EOIR), and more.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections


