Noitom Partners With Huawei X Labs To Deliver Alice Space: Lunar Mission Virtual Reality Demo Experience At MWC 2018

27 Feb 2018

The Chinese Tech Giant and The Motion Capture Company Join Forces To Showcase The Alice Space, Multi-Faceted, Virtual Reality Platform At The Mobile World Congress In Barcelona
Crowds attending the annual Mobile World Congress in Barcelona from February 26th through March 1st will have the opportunity to experience Noitom’s Alice Space experience with experimental cloud VR technology in partnership with Huawei X Labs.
  Alice Space is an out-of-home VR and mixed reality platform created by Noitom and conceived as a complete hardware and content package that allows venues like museums and science centers to offer their audiences realistic and immersive experiences in a simulated outer space and moon setting.
With original and bi-annually updated content created by award-winning studio Opaque Space in collaboration with NASA, Alice Space packages offer a turnkey solution that includes high fidelity hybrid optical-inertial tracking, and virtual reality backpacks and goggles for up to six players. With a tracking space of 7m by 10m, players can move freely and interact with one another as well as with physical objects. Alice Space gives operators uninterrupted, continuous play with up to three sessions per hour.
During the Mobile World Congress, Alice Space will be offering a new demo of Earthlight: Lunar Mission, where players can experience walking on the moon while interacting with each other and with props. Noitom and Alice Space will be at MWC Innovation City with Huawei X Labs and for the first time, the Alice Space demo will run with cloud VR technology that will potentially allow players to immerse themselves in the experience without VR backpacks.
The Alice Space experience at MWC will demonstrate prototypes of Huawei cloud VR technology in combination with a multi-player TPCast wireless solution. This experimental setup of Alice Space would potentially make the current use of backpacks electives by allowing the rendering to be performed in the cloud.
Alice Space at Huawei X Labs , Mobile World Congress will be located at Hall 4 Stand 4A30 from February 26-March 1st at Fira Gran Via, Barcelona.
Guests of MWC are invited to sign-up for the complimentary Alice Space demo during the show. The Earthlight: Lunar Mission demo runs for approximately 5 minutes and sessions will run in hourly blocks.
Founded in 2011, Noitom Ltd. works with a team of dedicated engineers who develop world-class motion capture technology for consumer and industrial markets through the integration of MEMS sensors, pattern recognition, human kinetics and wireless transmission. Noitom is an international leader in innovative technology for use in animation, film, medical applications, robotics and gaming. Noitom is headquartered in Beijing with affiliate offices in Shenzhen, Shanghai, Phoenix, Los Angeles and Miami.
Read More: 3D Augmented Reality Scenes – The Next Frontier Of AR For The Enterprise


