Epicor To Accelerate Cloud ERP Adoption And Bring The Intelligent Cloud To Manufacturers And Distributors Via Microsoft Azure

22 May 2018

Microsoft Azure to power delivery of industry-specific solutions to organizations, facilitating faster growth and innovation
INSIGHTS 2018 — Epicor Software Corporation, a global provider of industry-specific enterprise software to promote business growth, announced today from the main stage of its annual user conference Insights 2018 an expanded strategic partnership with Microsoft to deliver Epicor enterprise-class solutions globally on the Microsoft Azure platform.
“With Epicor solutions running in the cloud, customers will reap the benefits of greater agility, faster innovation, and favorable economics of Azure as they embrace digital transformation,” said David Willis, Corporate Vice President, Microsoft Corp.
Epicor will initially standardize cloud deployment of its Epicor ERP and Epicor® Prophet 21® enterprise resource planning (ERP) suites on Microsoft Azure, empowering customers to drive faster growth and innovation as they move to digitally transform their businesses.
Also Read: Interview With Alexandre Debecker, Chief Growth Officer – Ubisend
Steve Murphy
“Microsoft’s focus on the ‘Intelligent Cloud’ and ‘Intelligent Edge’ complement our customer-centric focus,” said Steve Murphy, CEO, Epicor. “We looked at several public cloud options. Microsoft Azure offers the best foundation for building and deploying enterprise business applications that will enable our customers’ businesses to adapt and grow. Today, we are seeing more than three-quarters of prospects ask about cloud ERP. As that deployment model becomes the norm, we are ready to enable our customers to move to the cloud with confidence leveraging the reliability, security, and scalability of Microsoft Azure.”
David Willis
“Standardizing cloud deployment of its world-class manufacturing and distribution solutions on Microsoft Azure is a natural step for Epicor with its history of leveraging forward-looking technology to deliver the utmost value to its customers,” said David Willis, corporate vice president, Microsoft. “With Epicor solutions running in the cloud, customers will reap the benefits of greater agility, faster innovation, and favorable economics of Azure as they embrace digital transformation.”
Also Read: Trescon’s World Blockchain Summit To Touchdown In Frankfurt
Unleashing the power of Epicor on most trusted public cloud platform
For most companies, the big question is not if, but when they will adopt cloud computing for the bulk of their IT operations, including the ERP software they use to manage inventory and product manufacturing.1
The Epicor and Microsoft partnership expands an already proven strategy to a global scale, as more customers are able to access the power of Epicor ERP and Prophet 21 running on the world-leading public cloud platform.
Microsoft technologies will optimize productivity and innovation for Epicor, its customers and partners. Epicor will leverage a range of Azure technologies including Internet of Things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI), and machine learning (ML) to deliver ready-to-use, right-sized solutions for midmarket manufacturers and distributors. Epicor also plans to explore Microsoft’s technologies for advanced search, speech-to-text, and other use cases to deliver modern human/machine interfaces that improve productivity for its customers.
Also Read: Trescon’s World Blockchain Summit To Touchdown In Frankfurt


