Blockchain Technology Research Innovations Corporation Launches Founding Donor Token Fundraising Campaign

22 Jan 2018

BTRIC Decided To Conduct Its Inaugural Fundraiser As An “Initial Donor Offering”, Raising Funds And Distributing A “Btric Founding Donor Token” To Its First Backers
Blockchain Technology Research Innovations Corporation (BTRIC) recently launched its 2018 fundraising drive.  As a 501(c)(3) non-profit charitable organization, BTRIC is raising contributions to advance its launch and 2018 costs for its primary initiatives. BTRIC decided to conduct its inaugural fundraiser as an “Initial Donor Offering”, raising funds and distributing a “BTRIC Founding Donor Token” to the first backers of the organization.
About the launch, BTRIC Chairwoman of the Board of Trustees, Terri Lei Beideman said, “Today’s launch represents the culmination of nearly a year of work on identifying the challenges and opportunities in the emerging technology ecosystem. Through the support of our donors, BTRIC is incubating promising projects into outstanding businesses, advancing key industry-wide initiatives, and enable research into blockchain and other emerging technologies. It is a milestone for our organization and we look forward to working with the emerging technology community to make a positive impact in the field. The profound changes that these technologies bring to the table are just beginning to shatter paradigms.”
BTRIC is actively partnering with leaders in the emerging technology industry, including industry businesses and other organizations, engineers, advisors, marketing professionals, and angel investors, and venture capital firms.  By engaging with the projects in BTRIC’s incubation program, these professionals have “hands-on” access to these cutting-edge emerging technology projects at their most early stage.  As they emerge from incubation and are divested as separate business entities, these partners will often continue their relationship with the business.  The need to fill the gap from “great idea, let’s make it happen” to “top-shelf startup, ready for investment and growth” is BTRIC’s core competency.
Founded in August of last year, BTRIC’s launch marks the beginning of it’s three key initiatives:
BTRIC Project Incubation Program identifies, fosters, researches, and develops projects that leverage emerging technologies to challenge the status quo. We infuse these projects with best-practices guidance and work with all stakeholders – innovators, engineers, advisors, marketers, partner organizations, and donors – to bring next-generation, “Internet 3.0”, projects to life. Then the projects separate from the nonprofit as investment-grade business, ready for investment, growth, and poised to shatter paradigms.  Its first projects include a donation platform that distributes its proceeds as cryptocurrency, a seafood traceability system that informs consumers about their seafood choices, and investigation of chartering a federal credit union to serve members and businesses in the cryptocurrency community.
BTRIC Institute focuses on promoting women and diversity in projects, standardizing regulatory compliance, and facilitating the development of standards that advance the common good of all projects in the emerging technology field.
BTRIC Labs conducts “blue sky” research and development on larger challenges facing the emerging technology ecosystem and allows our staff and contractors to contribute to open-source projects in the field.


