Sensory’s TrulySecure Facial Recognition Now Supports A Fusion Of 2D And 3D Camera Data For High-Performance Security

27 Feb 2018

TrulySecure, Sensory’s Class-Leading Facial Recognition Solution Found In Top-Selling Smartphones And Banking Apps, Now Utilizes Depth Information Provided By 3D Cameras
Sensory, a leader in speech and vision technologies that enhance the user experience and security of consumer electronics, today announced that its TrulySecure face and voice biometric recognition technology now supports IR and 3D image data from Time-of-Flight camera systems, allowing the technology to identify and authenticate enrolled users via facial recognition, even in complete darkness.
Todd Mozer
“Facial recognition has become the most trusted and fastest growing biometric security solution on the market. Just a couple years ago facial recognition adoption was slow because of two major obstacles associated with using 2D RGB cameras – the ability to operate in low- to no-light scenarios, and vulnerability to high-resolution video,” said Todd Mozer, CEO of Sensory. “While, we have mitigated nearly all potential security threats of 2D RGB cameras through advanced anti-spoofing algorithms and by fusing face and voice biometrics into one robust solution, we believe that utilizing IR and 3D image data will propel TrulySecure’s security and user experience further ahead of the competition.”
This latest update expands on Sensory’s market-proven fusion of face and voice biometrics by further improving facial recognition of enrolled users, especially in challenging lighting scenarios. For devices that feature a traditional front-facing camera and a front-facing IR sensor, TrulySecure can be utilized to run using just IR and 3D data, or a fusion of RGB 2D camera data and Time-of-Flight IR and 3D sensor data for an added layer of security. By fusing 2D, 3D and IR image data, TrulySecure is even better than before at preventing spoofing. By feeding IR and 3D data of the user’s face to TrulySecure, its anti-spoofing algorithms are able to detect the actual enrolled user versus somebody trying to spoof the system via a high-quality photo or video, eliminating the chances of somebody fooling the facial recognition algorithms – a concern also further addressed by requiring both the user’s face and voice be authenticated.
Ideal for a wide range of applications, including smartphones, tablets and PCs, Sensory is teaming up with Time-of-Flight sensor makers to make TrulySecure with IR and 3D face authentication available to device manufacturers around the world. This updated version of TrulySecure that supports IR and 3D image data will be available in the second half of 2018.
Sensory Inc. creates a safer and superior UX through vision and voice technologies. Sensory’s technologies are widely deployed in consumer electronics applications including mobile phones, automotive, wearables, toys, IoT and various home electronics. With its TrulyHandsfree voice control, Sensory has set the standard for mobile handset platforms’ ultra-low power “always listening” touchless control. To date, Sensory’s technologies have shipped in over a billion units of leading consumer products.


