Xero, The Beautiful Business Platform, Is Launching In Canada

19 May 2018

Xero is on a mission to rewire the economy to help Canadian small businesses thrive
Xero is officially launching in Canada, giving small businesses and accountants access to leading-edge AI and machine learning technology on a global cloud accounting platform.
As part of the launch, Xero is joining forces with Deloitte Private’s financial collaboration platform, ctrl by Deloitte, to give accountants across 56 offices in Canada the ability to accelerate their small business clients’ adoption of digital tools.
Until now, Canadian small businesses and accountants have been limited in their ability to take full advantage of the power of cloud technology. Only nine percent of Canadian small businesses are currently using cloud accounting software.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
According to Statistics Canada, approximately half of small businesses go out of operation within five years. By contrast, data from countries where Xero is already established shows that 85 percent of businesses working with an accountant on the Xero platform succeed five years and longer.
Xero’s mission is to rewire the global economy by connecting millions of businesses to their banks, advisors and each other. The Xero platform automates much of the mundane work that used to take up time for accountants and bookkeepers, and enables closer collaboration with small business clients by making it easy to share data, uncover insights, and plan for the future in real time. Key benefits include:
Automating mundane tasks: Xero uses AI and machine learning to automate the menial and repetitive tasks of running a business while increasing the accuracy of business data. Xero recently announced that it has delivered more than 1 billion machine learning recommendations to subscribers.
Connecting all business data on a shared ledger: Xero makes it easy for a small business to connect their banking information, as well as data from 600+ small business apps, including Canadian-based companies like Shopify and Hubdoc. This provides small businesses and accountants with a real-time view into what’s happening in the business.
Delivering real-time insights: the platform makes it easy for small businesses and accountants to have meaningful conversations about key decisions — everything from navigating compliance requirements to major business transactions.
Providing a dedicated support team: Xero is establishing dedicated local teams in communities across Canada to advise accountants on how best to transform their practices. Xero will work alongside accounting firms, helping them use technology to evolve from a focus on compliance services, to more strategic complex advisory services.
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive
“We believe that by connecting a small businesses’ financial world — using technology to bring financial data together with accountants and bookkeepers who can provide crucial advice — we can help more Canadian small businesses succeed and grow their profits” said Will Buckley, Director of Xero Canada. “We’re committed to working in partnership with both small businesses and accountants to transform the way business is done and to help the entire economy thrive”
Mike Pinkus
Bruce Derraugh
“We’re excited to work with Xero’s leading-edge financial technology to help our small business clients thrive,” said Bruce Derraugh, National Leader, ctrl at Deloitte.  “New technology, such as AI and machine learning, is opening up exciting opportunities for the accounting industry. Working with Xero will make it easier for us to help our small business clients connect all of their data and surface the meaningful insights that lead to better business decisions.”
“ConnectCPA’s mission is to help businesses grow and improve their profitability,” said Mike Pinkus, co-founder of ConnectCPA. “We have been leveraging the real-time collaboration benefits of Xero and the app ecosystem since 2014 to help us achieve our goal.  Our journey has allowed us to help hundreds of businesses across Canada to reach new heights.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World


