Blockchain Video Platform Viuly.io Connects To Ethereum Mainnet

29 Jan 2018

After A Successful Airdrop To Over 900,000 Ethereum Addresses In November, Blockchain-based video platform Viuly Will Connect Its Blockchain Video Sharing Platform To the Ethereum Mainnet on December 18th
Revolutionary online video ecosystem Viuly has taken the next step in its disruption of the video sharing industry, by connecting its platform at viuly.io to the Ethereum Mainnet on December 18th.
According to Ethplorer, the VIU token is now ranked number 1 of the top 50 tokens by transaction count on the Ethereum blockchain.
The video platform is now live: advertisers can now deposit VIU and pay for ads, and users can now withdraw the VIU they earn from watching videos, direct to their Ethereum wallets.
This development follows the successful completion of an airdrop campaign that saw the free distribution of 458 million VIU tokens to about 900,000 unique Ethereum users, essentially creating almost a million potential new users able to transact on the Viuly platform.
The alpha version of the platform has been live for weeks, and is now receiving over 40,000 unique visitors daily, recording 100,000 registered users.
Viuly’s VIU token is currently trading on Bit-z and Etherdelta.
Trade VIU with BTC on Bit-z and ETH on EtherDelta.
Advertisers are welcome to promote their videos, pre-roll video ads and banner ads on the Viuly platform using VIU tokens available for purchase on these exchanges. To promote this early opportunity, Viuly is now offering new advertisers a 100 percent bonus on any amount of tokens spent on advertising packages.
VIU tokens were airdropped to over 900,000 ETH wallets on November 5th. 
Everyone who had some ETH in their Ethereum wallets when the snapshot was taken on November 5th can view their tokens in their wallet by using the following settings to add a custom token:
Address: 0x519475b31653E46D20cD09F9FdcF3B12BDAcB4f5
Name: VIU
Decimals: 18
The Viuly referral program
To further encourage growth and adoption of the Viuly platform, all users can now benefit from a 3-tier referral program to be introduced on December 20th. Under this incentive model, users will earn VIU tokens when people register on Viuly as their referral, three levels deep:
1st Level: 50 VIU
2nd Level: 30 VIU
3rd Level: 20 VIU
Additionally, users will also earn a percentage of all referral earnings on the platform according to the following rate:
1st Level: 5%
2nd Level: 3%
3rd Level: 2%
Viuly’s mission is to disrupt the multi-billion dollar industry of online video sharing with its blockchain-based solution. Through decentralization and transparency, it aims to create a fair and open video network operating on an equitable model of revenue sharing.
VIU tokens are the native currency powering the Viuly video platform. They are used to transfer value between advertisers, content creators and users.


