MINDs Lab Provides Evolutionary AI Platform “maum.ai”

09 Jan 2018

Serves As A Platform To Implement A Variety of AI Services; Brain, M2U, MLT, BOT, BIZ
MINDs Lab is an AI platform company that provides an integrated AI solution, including everything from core algorithms to AI consulting services. With the onset of the AI era, many companies wish to provide intelligent chatbots, smart call centers, VR consultants, smart machines, AI-based education, and other various AI services.
However, it is very challenging for most companies to offer such services, as they do not have the resources of large conglomerates and lack technical proficiency and cost efficiency. Moreover, maintenance and repair are just as difficult for them as development. To support these companies to move forward in AI business, MINDs Lab provides evolutionary AI platform “maum.ai” which serves as a platform to implement a variety of AI services. The company also provides various AI services on top of the platform in a modular approach, which are readily available so that companies can use its AI services on an as-needed basis.
MINDs Lab is an AI platform company that provides an integrated AI solution, including everything from core algorithms to AI consulting services.
maum.ai platform consists of six modules, including Brain, an AI engine that functions independently; M2U, which processes input and output commands for various interfaces and devices; MLT, which provides a training platform for machine learning algorithms; BOT, a chatbot module; and BIZ, a business application optimized for different business areas that provides analyses of customer reviews and real-time customer support.
These modules can be assembled in a plug and play manner and provide customized AI services for each company. So far, MINDs Lab has participated in KEB Hana Bank’s text-banking AI project, developed the first AI platform-based civil complaint service with Daegu Metropolitan City, developed AI chatbot for Samsung Gear S, implemented AI call centers with various customers and is now applying its technologies and services to various industries, including finance, communications, manufacturing, and public services.
Taejoon Yoo
MINDs Lab CEO Yoo Taejoon explained, “MINDs Lab is a comprehensive AI platform company that handles all aspects of the general AI value chain, from the most basic technological elements to platforms, platform-based smart machines, vertical business applications and expert consultations. By doing so, we are able to provide companies that wish to adopt AI-based innovation with a more time and cost-efficient way of introducing AI services.”
Engaged in competition based on technological capacity and earned the “attention” of the UN and Forbes
MINDs Lab’s advanced technology has been receiving significant attention both at home and abroad. In September, the company was recognized as the best and most innovative small and medium enterprise at ITU Telecom World 2017, hosted by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), where it was the only Korean company to be selected. MINDs Lab was also included on Forbes Asia’s list of “10 South Korean Startups Breaking Out in 2017” earlier this year.
These achievements were the result of MINDs Lab’s establishment of its own research lab and efforts to further hone its technologies. Currently, 200 employees of MINDs Lab and related companies in four different countries are working to develop new technologies, and MINDs Lab is independently operating R&D labs specializing in various fields of AI, including linguistic intelligence, visual intelligence and smart machines.
Going beyond an “AI platform” to provide an “AI portal”
In the near future, MINDs Lab plans to focus on providing AI services in SaaS (software as a service) environment. Currently, the company has proven success in providing an on-site platform for companies to install the software and platform on their local servers, for information sensitive industries such as finance and governments. Leveraging these successes and experience, MINDs Lab plans to expand its business not only locally but also for global markets through SaaS platforms and services. Currently, MINDs Lab is drawing up strategies to provide these services for their global clients.
Going further, MINDs Lab’s vision is to go beyond providing an AI platform – to become an AI portal company. In particular, the company will focus its efforts on developing an AI portal based on machine reading comprehension (MRC) technology, which enables computers to understand the context of texts and answer questions. It expects that MRC will fundamentally change the way in which users acquire information. Moreover, MINDs Lab aims to provide AI-based call center BPO and AI-based education services not as B2B but as B2BC or B2C services.
Taejoon Yoo
CEO Taejoon Yoo of MINDs Lab remarked, “MINDs Lab has managed to increase its competitiveness by smoothly transitioning from big data to deep learning and then to AI. Currently, all we have is the concept of the service, but we hope to transform ourselves into a portal, where necessary information can be gained not through a text search but via an AI-based Q&A service.”


