Unity Technologies Announces Strategic Integrations With MediaMath And Oracle’s Moat

14 Feb 2018

Unity’s industry-leading mobile video ads and new partnership with top demand-side platform demonstrate the strength of its brand advertising offering
Unity Technologies creator of the world’s leading real-time development platform, announced today key integrations with MediaMath, the leading programmatic company for marketers, and Moat, a SaaS analytics measurement company for marketers and publishers that recently became part of the Oracle Data Cloud. The partnership enables MediaMath to access Unity’s advertising reach of 1.2 billion devices, further strengthening Unity’s Unified Auction. The Moat integration allows advertisers the ability to verify and measure attention metrics with confidence across scalable in-app programmatic inventory. Together, the integration of MediaMath’s programmatic platform combined with Moat’s robust viewability and attention metrics provides brands with a powerful way to both reach highly-engaged consumers on Unity’s platform, and uniquely evaluate advertising campaign performance in mobile gaming beyond traditional mobile advertising platforms.
Unity announces integrations with MediaMath and Oracle’s Moat, further strengthening its brand advertising offering.
Since integrating with Moat, Unity has demonstrated industry-leading ad quality scores. In January, Moat measured 98.5% valid and viewable rates for Unity, nearly doubling the in-app benchmarks of 49.2%, and video completion rates of 81.6% compared to averages of 33.6% (source: Moat Analytics Benchmarks: Q3 2017, Unity: January 2018). Now advertisers can confidently run their ads in a brand safe environment with some of the highest viewability and completion rates available.
Julie Shumaker
“Unity’s partnership with MediaMath provides clients with direct access to Unity’s premium audiences within 100% professionally-developed, often exclusive content,” said Julie Shumaker, VP of Advertiser Solutions at Unity. “To add to this advertiser value, Unity’s integration of Moat now validates unparalleled view completion rates and viewability scores nearly double the mobile in-app video benchmark. Integrating with Moat allows Unity to further validate viewability and present MediaMath, and all Unity unified auction buyers verified traffic.”
By integrating MediaMath’s major buying platform into Unity’s Unified Auction, an unbiased real-time advertising auction, all MediaMath advertisers can bid directly on inventory. “Marketers count on MediaMath to find the best opportunities to connect meaningfully with consumers across a variety of touchpoints,” says Lewis Rothkopf, GM of Media and Growth Channels at MediaMath. “Integrating Unity into MediaMath’s supply ecosystem expands our clients’ access to unique, premium in-app video inventory that promotes informative, engaging, and positive consumer interactions.”
Jonah Goodhart
While Unity’s video ads have always run to highly engaged audiences in professionally-developed entertainment apps, undergoing both internal and third party fraud and verification, the Moat integration allows advertisers to verify Unity’s valid and viewable rates for the first time. “The need for the right tools to measure attention and maximize campaign performance has become increasingly important as brands continue to invest in new platforms,” said Jonah Goodhart, SVP of Oracle Data Cloud and Co-Founder of Moat. “Our relationship with Unity reinforces Moat’s perspective on how attention and viewability influence outcomes, and we’re excited to work together to provide brands with new insights to help make smarter buying decisions.”
Unity is the world’s most popular real-time development platform. Creative content, games, and experiences made with Unity have reached more than 3 billion devices worldwide this year and were installed more than 20 billion times in the last 12 months.


