Pegasystems Named A Leader In Cloud-Based Dynamic Case Management By Independent Research Firm

15 Mar 2018

Among The Top-Level Criteria, Pega Received The Highest Scores For Architectural Support For Dynamic Case Management, Supporting Capabilities, And Revenue For Overall Case Management Business
Pegasystems, the software company empowering customer engagement at the world’s leading enterprises, today announced Forrester Research has named Pega Platform a Leader in their Forrester Wave report, The Forrester Wave™: Cloud-Based Dynamic Case Management.
Forrester Research evaluated Pega Platform among 11 of the most significant cloud-based dynamic case management vendors. Among the top-level criteria, Pega received the highest scores for architectural support for dynamic case management, supporting capabilities, and revenue for overall case management business. It also received among the highest scores in market approach, planned enhancements, evaluated version’s install base, and overall cloud installed base and growth.
Forrester notes in the report, “Pegasystems’ strengths in industry verticals, particularly in CRM and related applications, as well as very capable add-on analytics, give it an edge at the attractive high end of the process market, particularly for omnichannel solutions. Enterprises select Pegasystems for process agility, embedded AI, domain accelerators, and rule-centric apps and when integration strength is a core requirement, particularly for service request use cases.”
The report goes on to state, “This provider scored well across the board on AI, omnichannel, mobile, robotics, development and operations (DevOps), and cloud capabilities.”
Pega’s case management capabilities are rooted in the Pega Platform, the industry-leading application development platform thatconnects existing systems to drive superior customer engagement and operational excellence. It integrates core capabilities such as AI and decisioning, robotic automation, case management, mobile, and omni-channel UX within a unified platform. Pega Platform’s no-code, model-driven development environment results in accelerated deployments, faster iterations, and reduced development costs. It can run seamlessly on the cloud, on-premise, or a hybrid approach.
This recognition builds on recent analyst recognition of Pega for its CRM and case management capabilities. Pega was recently named a leader in Gartner Critical Capabilities for Intelligent Business Process Management Suites 2018 (2), The Forrester Wave™: Digital Process Automation Software (3), The Forrester Wave™: Real-Time Interaction Management, Q2 2017 (4), and the Gartner Magic Quadrant for CRM Customer Engagement Center (5) reports.
Don Schuerman
“Customers communicate with brands in a number of different ways, but still expect the same level of quality during each interaction regardless of channel,” said Don Schuerman, chief technology officer and VP of product marketing, Pegasystems.  “The Pega Platform provides organizations with an agile, intelligent, cloud-based environment to ensure consistency and deliver superior customer experiences. We believe this recognition from Forrester further underscores the value of Pega’s holistic approach connecting customer engagement to case management and digital automation.”
Pegasystems Inc. is the leader in software for customer engagement and operational excellence. Pega’s adaptive, cloud-architected software – built on its unified Pega® Platform – empowers people to rapidly deploy, and easily extend and change applications to meet strategic business needs. Over its 30-year history, Pega has delivered award-winning capabilities in CRM and BPM, powered by advanced artificial intelligence and robotic automation, to help the world’s leading brands achieve breakthrough business results.


