One Identity Acquires Balabit To Bolster Privileged Access Management Solutions

22 Jan 2018

Balabit’s Privileged Account Analytics And Log Management Capabilities Further Enhance Overall Identity And Access Management Portfolio
One Identity, a Quest Software business and proven leader in helping organizations get identity and access management (IAM) right, announced the acquisition of Balabit Corp., a leading provider of privileged access management (PAM), privileged account analytics and log management solutions that help businesses reduce the risk of data breaches associated with privileged accounts. Balabit’s PAM solution provides protection from threats posed by high-risk, privileged accounts, while its privileged account analytics solution provides an additional layer of protection by collecting and analyzing data from privileged sessions to help identify anomalous activity.
As organizations increasingly seek ways to proactively prevent cyber-attacks involving privileged accounts, including both insider threats and external attacks, PAM plays a more important role than ever in ensuring an organization is safe. The acquisition of Balabit, One Identity’s first as an independent company, further advances its drive to offer the industry’s most complete set of PAM solutions.
Currently, Balabit’s session management technology is embedded into the recently announced One Identity Safeguard solution through an OEM partnership. With this acquisition, One Identity can further expand its PAM solutions with machine learning-driven, privileged account analytics, which are critical to building a complete PAM and IAM stack. The acquisition also enables One Identity to control future development of Balabit technology to create an even more powerful solution customers can leverage to solve their critical PAM challenges.
John Milburn
“Today’s announcement reinforces One Identity’s continued commitment to investing in technology and the business in order to drive innovation, and creates more value for our customers and partners,” said John Milburn, president and general manager of One Identity. “With the addition of Balabit, we ensure that we can continue to deliver best-of-breed privileged session management and privileged account analytics capabilities to our customers and partners, and do so within the context of a modern, PAM solution that combines the best of One Identity and Balabit technology. We’re thrilled to welcome the Balabit team to One Identity, and we look forward to continue delivering the innovative technology and world-class support Balabit’s customers and partners have to come expect.”
“We’re excited to join the One Identity family and add our technology and expertise to One Identity’s rapidly growing portfolio of IAM solutions,” said Zoltan Gyorko, CEO of Balabit. “With today’s announcement, Balabit’s customers, prospects and partners will be able to enjoy our market-leading PAM tools within the broader stack of first-class PAM and IAM solutions in the One Identity portfolio. Together with One Identity, we can create new opportunities for our customers and partners to stay ahead of dangerous internal and external security threats.”
Jackson Shaw
“The addition of privileged account analytics is a perfect complement to the identity analytics capabilities in our recently released One Identity Starling IARI solution,” said Jackson Shaw, senior director of product management at One Identity. “The pairing of our technologies will enable our customers to know what entitlements their employees and privileged users have, and what they are doing with those entitlements. Identity and privileged account analytics – it’s a powerful combination that we’re excited to bring to market.”
Simplifying the IAM Journey
As the scope and complexity of IAM deployments continue to grow, organizations are increasingly seeking to streamline the number of vendors with which they partner. At the same time, few organizations are able to deploy every aspect of a complete IAM solution, including governance, access management, privileged management and identity-as a service, as a single project. By incorporating Balabit’s technology into One Identity’s already modular and integrated portfolio, organizations will be better equipped to start their IAM journey from anywhere and build out from there based on their specific needs.
Working in conjunction with existing security tools, Balabit’s PAM capabilities enable a flexible and people-centric approach to improving security, without adding additional constraints. Primary products within the Balabit solution portfolio include:
Privileged Session Management (PSM). Balabit’s Privileged Session Management (PSM) solution controls privileged access to remote IT systems, records activities in searchable, movie-like audit trails, and prevents malicious actions. PSM is a quickly deployable enterprise device – completely independent from clients and servers – that integrates seamlessly into existing networks. It captures the activity data necessary for user profiling and enables full user-session drill down for forensic investigations.
Privileged Account Analytics (PAA). Privileged Account Analytics (PAA) integrates detailed data from PSM, as well as a variety of contextual data, and processes them using unique sets of algorithms, in the process generating behavior profiles that are continually adjusted using machine learning. It detects suspicious activity by identifying unusual and risky deviations to baseline activity, offering a wide range of outputs from risk-based alerts to automated session termination.
syslog-ng. syslog-ng delivers the log data critical to understanding what is happening in IT environments. Whether it’s user activity, performance metrics, network traffic or any other type of log data, syslog-ng can collect and centralize it. syslog-ng helps organizations remove data silos and gain full-stack visibility of their IT environments.
Rich Partner Ecosystems
Like One Identity, Balabit’s customers rely on their trusted partners to deliver technologies they can count on. Balabit has a robust global partner network that will be welcomed into the One Identity Partner Circle, enabling Balabit and One Identity partners alike to expand the scope and reach of their offerings.


