Find.jobs Career Search Launches Using Google Cloud Job Discovery API

20 Feb 2018

TLD Improves Job Search Productivity By Leveraging Artificial Intelligence From Google Cloud
Employ Media, LLC, the registry in charge of the .jobs top level domain, launched their new flagship career search Find.jobs today. Find.jobs goes to market as part of the .jobs network, the #1 employment top-level domain.
Find.jobs uses the Google Cloud Job Discovery API. Find.jobs provides job seekers 8 Million+ open positions that are refreshed on a daily basis. “Our technology decreases the time spent looking for a job, increasing time spent applying. Productivity is important to every job seeker.” says Thomas Cooper, Chief Technical Officer.
  Throughout 2018, Find.jobs will extend their utilization of Google artificial intelligence for job search across their 40,000 job search sites. Over 500 million job seekers visit a .jobs websites for their job search. Find.jobs is the unifying hub to increase job search efficiency.
Job seekers can visit  Find.jobs and utilize advanced job search at no cost. Find.jobs For Employers, a talent professional offering will be publically available mid-2018.
Find.jobs is the flagship property of the .jobs network focused on the job seeker. We are the licensed operator of the .jobs Top Level Domain (TLD) on the Internet. The .jobs network is comprised of 40,000 domains owned and operated by Employ Media, LLC.
About the company: As the world’s #1 employment domain, over 500 million job seekers from over 150 different countries visit a .jobs website. The .jobs top level domain and Find.jobs are helping job seekers and employers connect through innovative technology and relentless passion. The Find.jobs team starts everyday knowing that millions of job seekers count on us to provide them with resources to find meaningful work.
Our teams help companies of all sizes hire the best talent and provide job seekers with exceptional resources to get hired. Our team also recognized the need to develop an industry-leading solution for job seekers. With 30% of the global workforce actively seeking a job change we set out to develop a unique solution. To service this need we launched Find.jobs. Our flagship .jobs property utilizes ElasticSearch and the Google Job Discovery API to surpass current search mechanisms. This is backed by more than 8 million open positions available to job seekers at any point in time.
Read More: Interview With Peter Cahill, CEO, Voysis


