J.D. Power Reaches Strategic Partnership With BitAuto On Digitization

30 Jan 2018

J.D. Power, the global leader in marketing data and analytics, today announced a strategic partnership with BitAuto, China’s leading consumer-facing automotive portal, to conduct joint research and develop big data and artificial intelligence.
The collaboration will help leverage J.D. Power research and analytics capabilities and BitAuto’s data and technology strengths across various business sectors. The partnership will strive to generate real-time data accuracy and new data analytics services, enabling Chinese automakers, dealerships and consumers to proactively and efficiently make effective decisions in an increasingly complex and dynamic market.
Under the partnership, J.D. Power will publish its independently conducted Voice of Customers-based ratings across various BitAuto platforms. The state-of-the-art ratings system will provide Chinese customers with full access to J.D. Power’s model-level ratings and scores, hence helping consumers make more informed purchasing decisions.
Additionally, J.D. Power and BitAuto will work together to digitalize new research subjects and methods. In China’s fast-evolving market environment, such joint research initiatives will help automakers navigate and understand latest market trends and disruptions.
Looking at the future in China, J.D. Power and BitAuto intend to explore an automotive, strategic data collaboration focused on developing data collection, processing, analytics and artificial intelligence. The partnership will aim to build the most efficient automotive big data center and artificial intelligence platforms serving China’s automotive industry.
Jacob George
“This partnership between J.D. Power and BitAuto is of strategic significance,” said Jacob George, Vice President and General Manager, J.D. Power Asia Pacific. “We look forward to teaming up with BitAuto to write the new chapter on digitization for automotive consumer insights and advisory services.”
“Our partnership is a win-win and impactful one,” said Zhu Lei, Chief Technology Officer of BitAuto. “J.D. Power is one of the most influential and respected market research institutions globally, known for its methodology, independence and integrity. BitAuto, after 18 years experiencing fast growth in China, possesses abundant data resources and technology capabilities. In teaming up, both parties will ensure effective and efficient data services and intelligent solutions development.”
Joseph Pacini
“Established in 1968, J.D. Power has accumulated rich experience, sophisticated methodology and an international talent pool conducting market research, data analytics and consulting services within the automotive industry over the past 50 years,” said Joseph Pacini, Chief Executive Officer of XIO Group. “J.D. Power’s collaboration with leading players such as BitAuto will further enhance its digital capabilities and services. We look forward to driving the global automotive industry’s sustainable growth in China’s connected and digitalized market.”
For decades, J.D. Power has been focusing on providing in-depth consumer and industry insights though its cutting-edge research methodologies and data analytics, capturing opinions and perceptions of millions of consumers. PIN, also known as Power Information Network, is the most representative data product launched by J.D. Power in 1993, specialized in helping OEMs and dealerships better manage their businesses, increase revenues and profitability using analytics tools.


