Qorvo Technology Is Driving The Future Of The Connected Car

30 Apr 2018

New e-book Highlights Solutions That Are Powering Connected Cars And 5G
Qorvo, a leading provider of innovative RF solutions that connect the world, today released its newest e-book, Connected Car For Dummies. The free guide, prepared in conjunction with publisher John Wiley and Sons, Inc., discusses how RF systems and technologies are creating the connected cars of today and tomorrow.
According to Counterpoint Research, the global connected car market is expected to grow 270% by 2022, with more than 125 million connected passenger cars forecast to be shipped between 2018 and 2022.1
Connected Car For Dummies highlights trends related to connected cars. It makes it easy to understand Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communication, and the implementation of massive MIMO and 5G infrastructures, which are essential to the evolution and safety of the connected car. The book explains how RF semiconductors are an essential building block that enables functionality and intelligence in connected cars.
Connected Car For Dummies covers topics such as:
Connected car visions and trends of today and tomorrow
Heterogeneous connectivity, including V2X, telematics and infotainment
The connected car ecosystem
Connected car RF solutions
Key connected car takeaways
Roger C. Lanctot, director, Automotive Connected Mobility for Strategy Analytics, said Connected Car For Dummies® is, “Everything you could possibly want or need [to know] about car connectivity…without the complexity. A must read for anyone entering the field or trying to sell cars.”
Gorden Cook, general manager of Qorvo’s Transport Business Unit, said, “The connected car is redefining our driving experience and will become an integral part of our connected future. Qorvo’s expertise in RF technology for 5G infrastructure and for automotive applications – from LTE, V2X and V2V, to telematics, antennas and sensors – provides a unique perspective on this trend for readers of the Connected Car For Dummies.”
Qorvo makes a better world possible by providing innovative RF solutions at the center of connectivity. We combine product and technology leadership, systems-level expertise and global manufacturing scale to quickly solve our customers’ most complex technical challenges. Qorvo serves diverse high-growth segments of large global markets, including advanced wireless devices, wired and wireless networks and defense radar and communications.  We also leverage our unique competitive strengths to advance 5G networks, cloud computing, the Internet of Things, and other emerging applications that expand the global framework interconnecting people, places and things.
Read More: Interview With Bryan Gold, Co-Founder, CEO At #Paid


