Evergage Named A Strong Performer Among Experience Optimization Platforms By Independent Research Firm

22 Jun 2018

1-to-1 Personalization and Customer Data Platform Company Recognized for Strengths in Behavioral Targeting and Recommendations, as Well as High Customer Satisfaction Scores
Evergage, The 1-to-1 Platform company, today announced that Forrester Research, a leading global research and advisory firm, has ranked Evergage as a Strong Performer in its report “The Forrester Wave™: Experience Optimization Platforms, Q2 2018,” published today.
Follow Us
This first-ever Wave report on the experience optimization platform space examines the “eight providers that matter most,” noting: “Savvy optimization pros seek to personalize customer experience across digital touchpoints by adopting a continuous optimization strategy, which Forrester defines as: An analytics-driven approach that seeks to leverage every customer interaction to evolve the understanding of the customer – which is, in turn, used to evolve and optimize current and future customer experiences.” A complete experience optimization platform, according to Forrester, is one that offers “a software solution with advanced capabilities for online testing, behavioral targeting and recommendation provisions.”
Read More: Recruiters Can Connect With Candidates Using AI
Addressing these capabilities from a single, consolidated platform is an increasing priority for companies today. Forrester notes: “CI [customer insights] pros have accelerated the consolidation of experience optimization practices in response to growing expectations that brands must deliver supreme, individualized digital experiences across an ever-growing breadth of digital touchpoints. On top of that, personalization must occur all within the context of the existing relationship, historical interactions and the customer’s needs at the moment of interaction.”
The Wave evaluated Evergage 1 – which provides a full suite of customer data platform (CDP), testing and real-time personalization capabilities, including targeting and 1-to-1 machine learning-driven recommendations and in-the-moment experiences. According to Forrester: “Evergage 1 differentiates itself with strong recommendations and behavioral targeting capabilities scores. Overall, Evergage has high customer satisfaction scores, with one reference stating, ‘Their ability to collaborate and listen to client needs, and then come up with a solution, is something that stands out to me.'”
Read More: Google And AI Predictions: When Am I Dying?
Evergage received the highest score among all vendors in the recommendations criterion, as well as the highest possible scores for the performance and supporting services criteria. Evergage also had among the highest scores in the platform experience criterion.
Karl Wirth
“Providing continuously optimized customer experiences is a critical differentiator for companies today – and Evergage is committed to helping them achieve this,” said Karl Wirth, Evergage CEO and author of the book “One-to-One Personalization in the Age of Machine Learning.” “We’re proud to be recognized as a Strong Performer in this Forrester Wave report – which, we feel, is a validation of our strategy, solution and customers’ successes. Evergage has invested in building a best-in-class personalization and customer data platform that gathers and processes deep behavioral and attribute data, and – powered by machine learning – delivers personalized, maximally relevant 1-to-1 experiences, across channels, in real time. Our inclusion in Forrester’s report, we feel, underscores our dedication to serving our customers’ needs and our commitment to innovation.”
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu


