ProntoForms Smart Mobile Forms Solution Launches On Geotab Marketplace

03 Apr 2018

Advanced mobile capabilities now available to large fleet tracking ecosystem
ProntoForms Corporation, the global leader in smart mobile forms for enterprise, today announced that the company has entered into an agreement with Geotab, a leading provider of telematics technology, to make ProntoForms’ integrated smart mobile forms capabilities available on the Geotab Marketplace.
Mansell Nelson
The new integration offering, targeted towards Geotab’s over 22,000 customers, enhances vehicle inspections, safety checklists, and other processes by embedding rich media and advanced capabilities, e.g. photos/sketches, time/date and GPS stamps, step-by-step guidance, maintenance history, embedded training videos, and more.
“ProntoForms is a great fit for companies that use mobile apps to track and optimize fleet operations and want to further improve the efficiency, productivity, and safety of drivers,” said Mansell Nelson, SVP of Business Development at ProntoForms. “Our solution automatically stores rich field data in the Cloud, and easily scales from a single daily vehicle inspection report (DVIR) form, to full-featured preventative maintenance solutions.”
The integration enables a seamless exchange of data, including On-Board Diagnostics (OBD-II), between the ProntoForms mobile app and the Geotab platform, helping drivers reduce time spent filling out forms in the field, unify reporting, and achieve regulatory compliance.
Geotab customers can use the ProntoForms no-code platform to quickly build, publish, and manage mobile apps for multiple regulated processes that are still handled on paper; HOS (Hours of Service), vehicle inspections, and more.
The integrated ProntoForms solution is available in two tiers:
Pronto DVIR – a single, low-cost, easy-to-deploy, feature rich DVIR form powered by ProntoForms’ smart mobile form platform.
ProntoForms Mobile Forms – the complete smart mobile forms solution for automating business processes in transportation, construction, oil and gas, utilities, and manufacturing.
Joey Marlow
“We’re delighted to partner with Geotab and look forward to working with their extensive ecosystem to help bring our mobile solutions to the market,” adds Nelson. “Through the Geotab Marketplace, ProntoForms can provide Geotab customers with the tools to help optimize their business and fleet.”
“ProntoForms adds clear value to the Geotab ecosystem by equipping our customers with an easy-to-deploy solution to help quickly perform common tasks in the field and integrate collected data within the Geotab platform,” said Joey Marlow, Executive Vice President of U.S. Operations at Geotab. “Additionally, this integrated solution helps to improve regulatory compliance reporting in an affordable way, and ultimately enables businesses to rapidly address an urgent requirement without complexity.”


