CallMiner To Host CX Intelligence Summit In Boston On Tuesday, April 10th

23 Mar 2018

Wayfair and Other Industry Leaders to Discuss Speed to CX Intelligence with AI and Automated Interaction Analytics
CallMiner, the leading platform provider of award-winning speech and customer engagement analytics, announced today that it will host industry leaders in the areas of customer service and sales, speech analytics, and quality assurance for a CX Intelligence Summit on Tuesday, April 10th in Boston, MA.
This full-day event is free to customer engagement professionals interested in learning how advanced analytics can be applied across all communication channels to unlock the intelligence needed to attract, support, and maintain customers. Discussions will focus on best practices and case studies from users, and demonstrations of the latest advancements in speech and customer engagement analytics.
Keynote speaker Liz Graham, VP of Sales and Service at Wayfair, will talk about the company’s innovative approach to delivering a flawless customer experience for its millions of customers. Additional speakers include Joe Paiva, Senior Analyst, Sales and Service at Wayfair, and Adam McCord, Quality Analytics Manager at BlueGreen Vacations, who will share their experiences using interaction analytics to uncover customer experience intelligence and answer questions in this interactive and educational event.
After the Summit, attendees are invited to a cocktail reception and tour of Wayfair’s Boston headquarters, featuring a modern space reflecting its dynamic culture and stunning views of Boston. Following the event, all attendees will receive a free CX Assessment to analyze their customer conversations for actionable intelligence.
Scott Kendrick
“The CX Intelligent Summit is a unique opportunity for CX professionals to hear from some of the people at the forefront of customer intelligence. The intimate setting will provide the opportunity for questions and discussion that can prove invaluable to those trying to make an impact on their customer experience program,” said Scott Kendrick, CallMiner Vice President of Marketing.
CallMiner believes that resolution is the fundamental driver of positive customer experiences. When contact center agents and others responsible for customer engagement are empowered by insight and feedback in near real-time, they can dramatically improve the rate of positive outcomes. With the tagline “Listen to Your Customers, Improve Your Business” our goal is to help companies automate the overwhelming process of extracting insight from phone calls, chats, emails and social media to dramatically improve customer service and sales, reduce the cost of service delivery, mitigate risk, and identify areas for process and product improvement. Highlighted by multiple customer achievement awards, including seven Speech Technology implementation awards in the past five years, CallMiner customers have been recognized for unparalleled success in leveraging Eureka interaction analytics to attain their business goals and objectives


