Blockchain Technology, Bethereum, Set To Remove The Taboo From Betting For Good

11 May 2018

Blockchain Powered Company Bethereum Officially Launches Its Gaming Platform That Is A Decentralized Betting Table Secured By Smart Contracts
Bethereum, the company introducing a blockchain-based solution to social betting, is bringing legitimacy and transparency to the social betting process with its “house-less” peer-to-peer betting ecosystem. Bethereum cuts out the middleman and keeps the interactions purely between players. Bethereum recently sold out their pre-sale round, raising over $4 million.”
What are some general themes that come to mind when you think of betting? For starters, in the long-term the house always wins. The odds are rarely in your favor, but rather lie with the bookies. Transparency and trust are irrelevant. Returns are low and social involvement is lacking. Traditionally, betting and gaming have a taboo and “back-alley” connotation.
But what if there was a space, free of judgment, with significantly more certainty, and maximum transparency? Bethereum offers an advanced framework combining Ethereum-based technology with powerful tools and applications to provide users with a fully decentralized alternative to traditional betting. Smart Contracts guarantee that participants will never be fooled, and that their money will be kept safe. This is done using oracles, which are trusted data feeds that send real-world information directly into the smart contract to ensure that correct and necessary actions are taken.
Bethereum successfully integrates innovative features, appealing design and community elements to offer an industry-first betting solution that users can wholeheartedly trust. The social community casts its net far and wide to reach people across the gaming world, from casual eSport lovers to high stake participants and all of the friendly competition in between. Bets are placed in user-created, public or private, groups while smart contracts protect funds and automatically distribute winnings based on bet conditions and outcomes.
Giacomo Tognoni
“Bethereum is introducing a new reality to the world of betting where the house will never win, because the house no longer exists,” CEO of Bethereum Giacomo Tognoni says. “The state of Colorado took a bold step with legislating an ancient social taboo and we’re planning to do the same.”
The Bether token will be available for purchase both in fiat and Ether, simplifying the process while simultaneously increasing the level of security. All platform transactions and the majority of ecosystem payments will be carried out in Bether. Bethereum will offer users the chance to securely participate in a wide range of games from eSports predictions, to casino games and casual bettings.
 Read More: Tales From The Crypto: Understanding Decentralized Currency


