Wavefront Partners With App-Scoop To Deliver Mobile App Solutions

07 May 2018

Wavefront and App-Scoop partner to jointly deliver innovative mobile app solutions to enterprises looking to digitally transform
Wavefront Innovation Society (“Wavefront”), a Centre of Excellence headquartered in Vancouver, BC, announced today a new partnership with App-Scoop, a consulting firm providing mobile app and web app solutions. App-Scoop is the latest addition to Wavefront’s trusted partner network, a group of companies dedicated to driving mobile and Internet of Things (IoT) innovation in Canada.
Wavefront and App-Scoop will collaborate to deliver mobile and IoT solutions into large enterprises. With complementary expertise and resources, the companies will provide full service design, development and deployment of web and mobile apps.
Wavefront works with mobile and IoT companies at all stages of their lifecycle and across multiple industry sectors to launch new business models, change organizational processes and enhance enterprise customers’ experiences. As an innovation intermediary, Wavefront helps large enterprises digitally transform their business by connecting them to innovative Canadian startups and small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs).
Christian Magsisi
App-Scoop is headquartered in Vancouver, BC with offices in Toronto and India. They provide full-service development and consulting around mobile solutions for iOS/iPad, Android and Windows Platforms. This partnership demonstrates Wavefront’s commitment to working with SMEs across Canada to foster an ecosystem of innovation.
“Wavefront is thrilled to welcome App-Scoop into our trusted partner network,” says Christian Magsisi, Vice President of Enterprise Solutions with Wavefront. “We look forward to engaging App-Scoop to help deliver transformative mobile solutions to enterprises.”
“App-Scoop is excited to be a part of Wavefront’s partner network,” says Pulkit Sahni, Founder of App-Scoop. “Our team is looking forward to engaging with Wavefront to provide next generation solutions for enterprise clients.”
Wavefront is actively looking to onboard additional SMEs into the trusted partner network to jointly deliver mobile solutions into large enterprise, as well as collaborate on marketing and thought leadership initiatives around IoT.


