More Than 50 Leading Companies Announce New Products, Services, Demonstrations & More At ICMI Contact Center Expo 2018

16 May 2018

Announcing companies include 8×8, Appian, NICE inContact, Sharpen & Talkdesk
The International Customer Management Institute (ICMI), the authority on contact center excellence, today reveals more than 50 announcements from leading companies in the contact center and customer service industry. Each company will showcase their latest solutions in the Expo Hall Monday – Wednesday of the event, offering attendees a first-look at some of the newest technologies impacting the industry.
ICMI Contact Center Expo 2018 will take place May 21-24, 2018 at the Walt Disney World® Resort. To learn more about the event and to register, please visit: ICMI.com/CCExpo
Patty Caron
“Each exhibitor at this year’s event plays a key role in transforming the contact center industry through their innovative technologies and dedication to improving customer experience,” said Patty Caron, Event Director, ICMI. “The contact center is rapidly evolving, making this year’s Expo Hall an exciting opportunity for attendees to interact hands-on with the latest solutions being used by today’s customer service professionals.”
ICMI Contact Center Expo 2018 Exhibitor News:
8×8 (booth 529) will demonstrate how to transform customer experiences with the X Series cloud-based contact center solution that enables companies to intelligently and quickly collaborate across any channel to drive first contact resolution.
AcuCall (booth 349) will showcase CenterMaster Omni-Channel Inbound/Outbound Call Center Solutions featuring newly released AcuScript CRM, AcuForce WFM, and AcuChat Web with Award-Winning Predictive/Preview/Progressive/TCPA Compliance Dialer, IVR “Pay by Phone”, ACD, IP-PBX, Email, Social Media and Business Intelligence. This hosted HIPAA and PCI Compliant platform is localized for English and Spanish languages.
AmplifAI Solutions, Inc. (booth 620) is showcasing its AI-powered front-line productivity and performance enhancement platform. The platform demonstrates how AmplifAI is digitizing labor, personalizing development, and delivering AI-powered engagement, productivity and performance enhancement for contact centers.
Appian (booth 328) announces a new product for rapidly building unique contact center solutions that deliver unrivaled customer experiences. Appian Intelligent Contact Center™ Platform is a cloud platform tailored to the unique needs of contact center teams.
Aspect (booth 612) announces the release of Aspect CXP 18, which includes enhanced features for chatbot developers that make it easier for companies to meet consumer demand for sophisticated digital self-service. Aspect CXP 18 is designed to create dynamic self-service applications that enable frictionless customer-company interactions across all interactive voice response (IVR) and digital self-services channels.
Branch Messenger (booth 629) announces the industry’s first Shift Flexibility Engine™. The Shift Flexibility Engine™ empowers organizations to send shifts across your network of your call centers and at home agents.
Call Design (booth 552) will showcase its newest Workforce Optimization consulting and training offerings, created to maximize WFO success. A team of experts teaches remotely and on-site: WFM/PM Fundamentals, Best Practices, WFM Forecasting/Scheduling/Tracking (Beginner and Advanced), and more; supporting our world-class Workforce Engagement Management solutions.
CallMiner (booth 616) announces Eureka Coach, the evolution of myEureka into a cloud solution that provides role-based dashboards with alert-triggered assignments from supervisors. Objective scoring for every interaction based on call detail and sentiment analysis drives action from insight, and agent dashboards offer personal statistics with team comparisons to encourage self-improvement.
Cisco (booth 300) will showcase the Customer Journey Platform (formally CC One) with Spark Care elements, which enables agents to deliver exceptional customer care by providing contextual, continuous, and capability-rich journeys to consumers.
Clarabridge (booth 623) will showcase the right combination of Big Data and AI technologies to help you unlock and boost the value of the Contact Center to increase sales, improve operations, retain customers and ensure compliance.
Comm100 (booth 343) will demonstrate its new AI powered chat and expanded integrations at ICMI Contact Center Expo. Chatbot 2.0 is a self-learning AI powered bot that books meetings, answers questions, or helps customers make payments.
Content Guru (booth 507) will demonstrate its multi-award-winning storm® platform, showcasing how storm’s cloud contact center and customer engagement capabilities can help businesses to better communicate with their customers. storm delivers omni-channel contact routing across SMS, web chat, email, voice, WebRTC and AI, as well as integration with third-party systems.
DailyPay (booth 324) will present its patent-pending technology, which gives contact center employees instant access to their earned but unpaid wages so they reach their financial goals. Offering employees a daily payment option has proven to reduce turnover while meaningfully improving employee recruiting and engagement.
eGain Corporation (booth 341) will present how a telco giant improved First-Contact Resolution (FCR) by 23% and Net Promoter Score (NPS) by 20%, while reducing advisor time to competency by 50% across 10,000 contact center agents and 550 retail stores, with eGain’s AI and knowledge management solution for the omnichannel contact center.
Employment Technologies (booth 624) will showcase its award-winning line of EASy Simulations at this year’s ICMI Expo – specifically designed to help contact centers hire great people FAST. Offering a fun and engaging way to pinpoint the best talent, EASy Simulations are designed for mission-critical roles, including: agents, eReps, Collections, Team Leaders, and more.
Envision (booth 448) will showcase Click2Coach, the easy to deploy premise or cloud WFO solution that increases agent effectiveness, engagement and retention. Come see how Click2Coach, using data driven quality monitoring through CRM integration and speech analytics, can improve your contact center performance and customer experience.
First Orion (booth 614) will showcase its Call Knowledge suite of data-driven calling solutions whereby businesses can know, protect and enhance their calling activity—inbound and outbound, pre- and post-call. Businesses can use this data to reduce risk associated with fraud and compliance, increase customer satisfaction, and yield more profitable calling solutions.
Five9 (booth 515) will showcase the Virtual Contact Center and the cloud contact center platform for the digital enterprise. With Digital Transformation fueling rapid change in customer expectations, the Virtual Contact Center allows businesses to accelerate how they respond to be competitive, differentiated, and provide personalized customer experiences.
Fonolo (booth 627) announces its new “widget,” allowing callers to request a call-back directly from a company’s website or mobile app. It offers substantial improvements – it supports live call feedback, is fully responsive so it can work on any size display, and offers full ARIA features to support the Americans with Disabilities Act.
GLOBO (booth 528) will demonstrate its omnichannel language management platform, GLOBO HQ. GLOBO HQ provides on-demand interpreting and translation services, in over 250 languages, so support teams can communicate with customers in their native language. By streamlining language services through GLOBO HQ, organizations can increase agent productivity and improve customer experience for limited-English speakers.
injixo (booth 513) will present the release of their brand-new Auto Forecast at ICMI Contact Center Expo. For centers who need to save time and want more accurate forecasting, injixo will be showcasing just how their new auto forecast is revolutionizing workforce management in contact centers.
InTheChat (booth 615) will showcase its easy-to-use, single interface dashboard for SMS, Social, Live Chat, Messaging Apps and Apple Business Chat Beta. This dashboard allows you to take advantage of skill-based routing, CRM integration, and powerful NLP and AI/chatbots.
Jabra (booth 415) launches the Engage franchise, the world’s most powerful line of professional wireless headsets. Engage franchise has military grade encryption, superior wireless connectivity, range of 490 feet, more talk time and your choice of wearing styles.
Jacada (booth 541) will showcase its Autonomous CX suite enabling enterprises to automate business flows once and use in multiple channels to standardize and optimize customer service flows. This allows you to effortlessly design and automate assisted-service or self-service processes across the customer journey, and ensure business agility, high resolution rates, efficiency, and standardization across channels.
Language I/O (booth 622) will provide live demos of its multilingual customer service software and showcase its latest CRM integrated products for chat, email and article translation, covering 150+ languages. Each feature is designed to decrease agent response time, increase translation quality, improve CSAT scores and reduce customer service costs, directly within the CRM.
Lessonly (booth 621) will showcase their new, omnichannel practice solutions for more realistic and effective contact center training—including video, email, chat, and ticket practice. Also, debuting is the Better Work Assessment. This 10-minute quiz is designed to help customer service teams evaluate their training, improve rep performance, and elevate the customer experience.
Lionbridge (booth 611) will showcase GeoFluent at ICMI Contact Center Expo. GeoFluent empowers your agents with on demand, over-the-phone interpreters, auto-translated emails and chatbots, etc., making it easy for your agents to help your customers, minimizing repeat calls and boosting CX and CSAT scores.
Loxysoft (booth 436) will showcase ProScheduler at ICMI Contact Center Expo. This product includes forecasting, schedule optimization, Call Traffic Report, Agent Performance, TimeWeb Portal, Training Planning tool, Advanced Targeting tool, Playbook, Management Reports tool and Traceability tool.
MiaRec, Inc. (booth 640) will showcase its award-winning Workforce Optimization suite that includes call recording, live monitoring, speech analytics, screen capture and agent evaluation. Also featured is the new advanced reporting tool for contact centers.
Mitel Networks (booth 540) will demonstrate its latest innovations in customer experience management including MiContact Center Business, MiCloud Connect Contact Center, and MiContact Center Outbound, and will be debuting MiCloud Engage Contact Center, a true public cloud, multi-tenant CCaaS that overlays seamlessly over-the-top of your existing environment.
NICE inContact (booth 407) will showcase NICE inContact CXone, the world’s #1 cloud customer experience platform. CXone helps organizations be first in their industry by powering exceptional experiences for customers and employees. CXone unifies Omnichannel Routing, Analytics, Workforce Optimization, Automation and Artificial Intelligence—all built on an Open Cloud Foundation.
Noble Systems (booth 606) announces the release of Conversations Analytics, a native speech analytics application for Noble’s Contact Center platform. Conversations Analytics offers post-call screening, while Conversations Analytics Now delivers real-time analysis. Noble developed the product using its own intellectual property, and they offer direct integration with Noble’s management toolsets.
Orkin Pest Control (booth 340) will highlight its proactive bed bug inspections and employee education programs – preventing downed workstations, decreasing lost revenue and boosting employee morale.
Pipkins (booth 601) will showcase IntelliVIEW™, a powerful new set of monitoring, mentoring and collaboration tools for its workforce management software suite, which are designed to help supervisors and agents stay fully engaged and connected no matter where they work…different floors, different buildings or different cities.
SAYINT (booth 338) will showcase its multi-award winning artificial intelligence and machine learning based omni-channel conversational analytics solution. The solution enables you to draw actionable insights from all conversations, while also automating auditing and regulatory requirements.
SHAKER (booth 636) will showcase its Virtual Job Tryout® technology that enables companies to combine predictive analytics with human judgment. Through this technology, candidates complete day-in-the-life experiences that engage, educate, and predict success on the job. Precise candidate job-fit reports empower recruiters to identify best-fit candidates faster, increase new-hire retention, and improve quality of hire.
Sharpen (booth 321) announces the launch of Sharpen University, a suite of applications that provides proactive training and coaching for contact center agents and supervisors. At the heart of Sharpen University is the Agent Experience Score (AXS). This metric, calculated using a proprietary algorithm, represents each agents’ effectiveness, efficiency and level of empowerment.
SmartAction (booth 637) releases their newest solution, Omni-bot™ for the contact center. This release demonstrates AI expertise in both voice and digital customer service channels. Omni-bot™ is a conversational AI engine built in one channel and deployable in any other desired channel, the first such omnichannel offering of its kind.
Softcom Technologies (booth 609) will showcase the latest release of their Advanced Contact Center Analytics Solutions. Users can design their own dashboards with minimal effort, and access information from a wide variety of data sources. Softcom will also be debuting Command Center Solution, new in Softcom Analytics Version 8.
Spectrum Corporation (booth 310) will showcase Spectrum’s XorceView software solution that enables a unique ability to combine real-time data from multiple Contact Center applications and target specific Agent and Supervisors with tailored reports directly on their desktop.
Stella Connect (booth 440) announces that feedback requests can now be sent out via SMS as well as email. This new SMS functionality further increases the volume of agent-level feedback that will flow into your contact center, presenting you with more opportunities to motivate your front-line team and drive more effective coaching and QA.
T-Metrics, Inc. (booth 630) will showcase its TM-Cloud Contact Center for delivering customer voice, email, video, chat, SMS, and social media interactions to agents. They will also showcase their real-time supervisory dashboards, reports package, and intuitive administrative tools that provide advanced capabilities and metrics that improve service levels and enhance the customer experience.
TalentKeepers (booth 600) will showcase their stay interview solution CLEAR Connections®. This award-winning solution provides tools for leaders to discuss their employee’s aspirations, preferences and growth to ignite employee engagement and retention.
Talkdesk (booth 420) showcases its “Enterprise Power, Consumer Simplicity” approach to help you win in the Customer Experience economy. You’ll experience CX Manager, which empowers frontline admins to implement intelligent routing flows simply, and without need for technical expertise. Also, explore real-time mobile/web context for more personalized interactions.
Teleopti, Inc. (booth 326) will discuss and demonstrate its full suite of dynamic, user-friendly WFM software including the latest features available. Teleopti’s workforce management software combines optimized, automated forecasting and scheduling with advanced agent empowerment and real-time management functionality to drive profitable customer service operations, empowered employees and engaged customers.
Tri Source International (booth 602) will present data on their most recent 2018 Case Study illustrating the Latin America benefits compared to other international regions off shore. Additionally, TSI will showcase their comprehensive labor and linguistic talent via booth demos, videos and live engagement.
UJET (booth 401) will showcase its real-time communications platform that makes it easy for customers and businesses to instantly connect so they can resolve problems faster. They will showcase how these platforms can improve call center efficiency, enhance the customer experience, and provide more repeat business.
unymira (booth 334) presents its ACTIVE knowledge base, Knowledge Center, which is unique in the market. The solution helps your customer service agents to find answers easily and quickly. The innovative technology enables contact centers to maximize productivity and to improve customer experience through all support channels.
Upstream Works Software Ltd. (booth 302) will showcase Upstream Works for Finesse (UWF) – an omnichannel agent workspace with tools to deliver a transformed, personalized CX. UWF helps organizations to understand and act on the cross-channel customer experience, enabling seamless interactions and efficient task management. Highlighted capabilities include Knowledge Management and FollowUp.
Voice Teleservices (booth 332) will showcase its domestic inbound and outbound contact center services at ICMI Contact Center Expo 2018. These outsource customer engagement services include call handling, email chat and customer surveys/analytics.
Yodel Voice (booth 554) will reveal its state of the art software system, which enables any representative, regardless of location or accent, to sound professional and clear by using avatars. Through the Yodel Dashboard, Yodel Voice manages data collection, tracks live transfers and focuses on delivering your inbound team with warm live transfers.
Zoho Desk (booth 406) will showcase the industry’s first context-aware help desk software that helps businesses focus on the customer. This software empowers customer service teams with detailed customer information and insights, helping them deliver top-notch service every day.


