NDimensional Appoints Gordon Brooks Chairman Of Board Of Directors

14 Feb 2018

Gordon is currently the Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of Katalyst, a strategic advisory firm, and Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors for Zixi, a software platform that enables the media industry to broadcast quality live video over IP
nDimensional announced the appointment of Gordon Brooks as Chairman of the Board.  Gordon’s focus will be to rapidly grow nDimensional, an Artificial Intelligence (AI), big data and IoT application development platform provider, into a global brand by working with the executive team, clients and partners to create significant recurring economic value for every client.
Gordon is currently the Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of Katalyst, a strategic advisory firm, and Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors for Zixi, a software platform that enables the media industry to broadcast quality live video over IP. Previously he served as President of C3 IoT. Gordon is a 5-time CEO and has founded, helped launch or transformed 8 companies, resulting in 2 IPO’s with a combined market cap of over $11 billion, numerous entity sales totaling over $1 billion, 17 acquisitions and has served on 10 boards.
Curt Lefebvre
“nDimensional is excited to have Gordon join the Board of Directors as our Chairman. He is deeply knowledgeable about the complex market for operationalizing AI and IoT software.  He understands the strategies businesses must establish to be successful in this market.  Gordon’s experience in building and growing businesses will be an invaluable asset to nDimensional as we expand our market share.” Dr. Curt Lefebvre, nDimensional Founder & CEO
Gordon Brook
“I feel very privileged to take on the role of Chairman at such an exciting stage of nDimensional’s growth and strategy development.  I have a long history working with innovative technology companies and it is clear to me that nDimensional has built a powerful and unique platform capable of embedding AI, big data and IoT applications into products and services to drive quantifiable business value.  I look forward to working with the executive team to ensure nD continues to expand its reach and positively impact all data-rich markets.” Gordon Brooks


