HNA Technology’s Intelligent Logistics Platform A Resounding Success At The IBM Watson Build Global Finals

12 Feb 2018

HNA Technology, a division of global Fortune 500 multinational HNA Group,focused on artificial intelligence, big data and cloud computing, and its Technology Research Institute’s AI-drivenIntelligent Logistics Platform received high acclaim and recognition by experts at the IBM Watson Build Global Top 8 Finals, after taking away first prize in the Greater China Region.
The IBM Global Watson Build Challenge is based on IBM Watson’s world-class, successful Cognitive Build, which explores AI business scenarios and solves industry issues. After more than four months of fierce competition, the HNA Technology Research Institute, as the Greater China Region Champions, stood out from more than 400 outstanding teams in the Global Finals held in New York.
Maureen Fleming
The Intelligent Logistics Platform was highly recognized by the panel of judges for its advancement in the areas of technology, commerce and innovation. Ms. Maureen Fleming, vice chairman of the IDC Project, commented, “HNA’s Intelligent Logistics platform, with its technology maturity, business prospects and other aspects are amazing, I believe it will have a profound impact on the industry.”
The container transport industry of China takes up 90 percent of global share in terms of the number of containers and cranes. However, it is still far behind in terms of the software for container transportation. The entire process is tedious, the degree of intelligence employed is low and, as a result, the cost is high.
HNA Technology’s Intelligent Logistics Platform combines Watson’s AI abilities in cognition and interaction, using machine learning optimization algorithms and blockchain technology to allow maritime transport involving multiple parties to understand the cargo information and greatly enhance the handling speed of container transport.
At the same time, the platform also implements the three functions of maritime logistics monitoring and management, logistics processes and logistics robot identification and coordination through the help of HNA’s intelligent cloud technology and Watson’s Visual Recognition technology to further improve container shipping efficiency and greatly reduce logistics costs.
“HNA hopes to combine the depth of artificial intelligence with the physical industry to further accelerate the full realization of container shipping,” explained Li Shubo, HNA Technology Research Institute’s team leader.
In recent years, HNA Technology has been making steadfast developments in the areas of cloud technology, big data, artificial intelligence, data consulting and services, and smart manufacturing to create a world-class high-tech industry group and build a “fourth-rate” data platform. In 2017, HNA Technology led the establishment of the first unmanned cargo ship development alliance in China, leading the industry in cutting-edge development. In terms of core technology strength, it has set up the Future Data Ecology Research Center with the Imperial College London to focus on the research and development of big data. It has also partnered with business incubator RocketSpace to create a global platform for innovation and entrepreneurship and has recently launched the highly anticipated HNA Cloud Marketplace, the new one stop cloud service platform providing a complete upstream and downstream service for users in their digital transition.


