RapidMiner Named A Leader In The 2018 Gartner Magic Quadrant For Data Science And Machine-Learning Platforms

27 Feb 2018

Rapidminer Positioned As A Leader For The Fifth Consecutive Year
RapidMiner, the company that delivers real data science, fast and simple, announced that Gartner, Inc. has positioned RapidMiner in the Leaders quadrant of the 2018 Magic Quadrant for Data Science and Machine-Learning Platforms. According to Gartner, “Data science and machine-learning platforms enable organizations to take an end-to-end approach to building and deploying data science models.”
RapidMiner is a software platform for data science teams that unites data prep, machine learning, and predictive model deployment. Organizations can build machine learning models and put them into production faster than ever, using RapidMiner’s lightning fast visual workflow designer and automated modeling capabilities. RapidMiner eliminates the complexities of cutting edge data science by making it easy to use the latest machine learning algorithms and technologies like Tensorflow, Hadoop, and Spark.
“Organizations rely on data science and machine learning platforms like RapidMiner to drive revenue, reduce costs, and avoid risk,” said Tom Wentworth, chief marketing officer at RapidMiner. “We believe that being recognized as a Leader for the past five years is a testament to the profound business impact that we’ve delivered for our customers.”
Gartner states, “Leaders are in the strongest position to influence the market’s growth and direction. They address all industries, geographies, data domains and use cases and, thus, have a solid understanding of, and strategy for, this market. Not only are they able to focus on executing effectively, based on current market conditions, but they also have solid and robust roadmaps to take advantage of new developments and advancing technologies in this rapidly transforming sector. They provide thought leadership and innovative differentiation, often disrupting the market in the process. Leaders are suitable vendors for most organizations to evaluate. They should not be the only vendors evaluated, but at least two are likely to be included in a typical shortlist of five to eight vendors. They provide a benchmark of high standards to which others should be compared.”
Read Also: Interview With Tomer Kashi, Co-Founder & CEO, SkyWatch


