Anti Hero Capital: A Crypto Fund Investing Using Evolutionary Science

05 Apr 2018

Anti Hero Capital is a fund investing in crypto assets and digital currencies using evolutionary science
The founders of one of Australia’s first managed investment funds dedicated entirely to cryptocurrencies, the Anti Hero Capital Fund (Fund), believe that a quantitative application of evolutionary science can unveil stable returns from this burgeoning asset class.
The investment manager, Anti Hero Capital Pty Ltd (Anti Hero Capital), is seeking to raise $30 million dollars for the Fund from wholesale investors, providing them with actively managed exposure to the global suite of digital currencies.
Matthew Snowden and James Nguyen
James Nguyen
The Fund, of which Anti Hero Capital is investment manager, uses a quantitative approach based on evolutionary science to determine which cryptocurrency tokens have the highest potential for rapid growth.
Co-founder James Nguyen said cryptocurrencies could be the fastest growing asset class of the century.
“Cryptocurrencies are an entirely new asset class that is uncorrelated to traditional markets, with huge growth and diversification potential,” Mr Nguyen said.
“In 2017, the total market capitalisation of the cryptocurrency industry grew by 3,300 per cent from $18 billion to $610 billion USD. In comparison, the S&P 500 index only increased by 26 per cent over the same period.
“Still, there has been a lot of confusion and negative market sentiment around this asset class. We’ve seen the accelerated appreciation and decline of Bitcoin in recent months, with such volatility impacting overall market sentiment.
“However, the Bitcoin boom was the product of collective speculation and a lack of technical knowledge of the underlying asset — many investors were merely following an investment trend. We’re intentional in delineating that noise from true signal, which shows that the most notable trend over the past 12 months has been the dramatic appreciation of digital currencies other than Bitcoin. In 2017, the best performing crypto investments were not recognised as the market’s top currencies at the start of the year.”


