RTB House Unveils Deep Learning-Based Technology For Predicting CTR Performance

02 Nov 2017

RTB House, a global retargeting technology provider for top advertisers, has announced the release of another deep-learning based breakthrough for marketers, which provides them with an ultra-precise way to estimate potential clicks on ads, yielding stronger ROI.
“With the recent release of RTB House’s click through forecasting tool, 100% of our company’s algorithms are now deep learning-based,” said Bartłomiej Romański, Chief Technology Officer RTB House. “The achievement provides greatly empowers our customers and is a vast improvement over other methods typically used in retargeting”.
Deep learning, or the subfield of machine learning that uses algorithms inspired by the structure and function of the brain or ‘neural networks,’ is increasingly popular with marketers as they imagine a world in which machines like IBM Watson might out-diagnose human physicians and more.
Radoslaw Dobrolecki, RTB House’s North American Business Development Director, said, “The predictable performance results of our new click-through forecasting tool and all others we’ve release to date and on our roadmap are precisely why so many marketers around the world and in the US are moving to our platform.”
Jeremy Wagner, eCommerce Marketing Manager at GiftsForYouNow.com, said, “Some of the hype is quite futuristic. The real proof is when today’s marketing providers can actually show that deep learning driven solutions predictably drive better results. In RTB House’s case it positions itself as the ‘Waze’ of marketers, in the sense that, like Google’s popular drive route application, its deep learning based solutions help marketers make real-time decisions that help them get to their goal destinations the fastest. ”
Radoslaw added, “In every case, RTB House’s Deep Learning approach proves a winner and our customers’ performance increases prove it. With our new clickthrough forecasting tool, our customers are showing an average click-through boost of 16.5% without any increased spend requirement.
RTB House’s new click-through forecasting tool is the fourth major deep learning solution the company has released this year. The increase in overall performance the retargeting solutions for marketers are driving strong results. To date, marketers have shown as much as a 29% increase in conversions and increases in product selection efficiency by up to 41%. Increasing click-through rates (CTRs), or the ratio of clicks on the digital CTAs marketers introduce to their target audiences is one of the most common metrics of digital advertising success as it shows engagement and is the gateway to moving audiences further along the commerce funnel. By employing technology that can predict users’ behaviors based on previous activities and recommend the best product offer for them, brands can increase CTR metrics and reach their most valuable potential customers without any spending increase. Essentially they can spend the same, but drive more activity.


