Starcro, The First PoX(Proof Of EXpansion) Applied Blockchain Platform In The World

13 Mar 2018

Starcro proposed its unique PoX(Proof-of-eXpansion) system which compensates defects of PoW and PoS algorithms. PoX suggests innovative blockchain rewards system that individuals can reap the rewards based on their capacity without high computing power and stake possession.
Road Map for Starcro
The user of Starcro platform, Starcro Prover(SP), connects each other through the referral system to provide expansion to the PoX algorithm. Starcro can track down the illegal fund or money laundering using its coin as it collects minimum personal information from each node, which is different from anonymity feature of common blockchain. The PoX also provides a high measure of safety from “51% attack” by expanding provers’ network within Starcro platform.
Starcro requires 10 seconds for block mining and 3 seconds for transaction. Starcro is an innovative blockchain in that SP can freely use its platform with given 1XSC (Starcro Coin) when they sign up.
One of the biggest strengths of Starcro is applicability and convenience. Starcro is a global content service platform that provides a live payment and transaction interface as opposed to other cryptocurrencies that have limited use in everyday life. XSC-charged pre-paid card supports direct charge and payment within an application, and enhances user convenience by linking personal computer. Furthermore, Starcro will provide a trade exchange platform, smart wallet, mobile messenger, and Starcro cast to design the rewards system for connected provers who use Dapp. Therefore, Starcro realizes a freely available and practical blockchain platform service that anyone can use in anywhere at any time with any type of device and network.
Jungyong Kim, the President of the Boards of Korea Software Development Business Association and the CEO of KBIDC Corp., supervises the Starcro Project team. He has been engaged in the software development industry for almost 20 years as an engineer and accomplished many successful public projects.
Starcro issues the total supply of 10 billion XSC for 30 years and part of the transaction fees will be used for donations, blockchain development project, and bright individual training support. The first Starcro’s ICO lasts until March 19th and it provides 200% of bonus during this period.


