David Rich And John Hardigree Join As Executive Advisors Of Roobot

20 Feb 2018

CRM and Analytic Solution Experts Join Roobot’s Executive Team And Board To Accelerate Development Of AI-Driven Personal Shopping And Service Solutions
John Hardigree
Roobot, an industry leading Personal Shopping Assistant for retailers, manufacturers and service providers, today named David Rich and John Hardigree, who pioneered the use of predictive analytics at Accenture and Revolution Analytics (now part of Microsoft) as Executive Advisors. John, who is also an investor in the company, will play a key role joining the Board of Directors. And, together they will work with existing leadership to expand the company’s partner ecosystem, enhance its strategic vision and help the company operationalize its vision for significantly improving the shopper experience for its clients.
Dave Rich
Rich is Chairman and CEO of DBR & Associates, an independent consulting and advisory firm, where he, Hardigree and others focus on a portfolio of C-suite agenda topics such as “Digital/Business Transformation” nextgen “Marketing Automation Platforms “, “Artificial Intelligence/Analytics Applications” and “Virtual Reality Solutions”, as well as operationalizing “Growth/Exit Strategies”. Prior to forming DBR & Associates, Rich and Hardigree successfully grew Revolution Analytics, the global leader in Open Source R (predictive analytics) tools, where they served as Executive Chairman/CEO and CBDO respectively, (as well as investors). In 2015, Revolution Analytics was successfully acquired by Microsoft and integrated into their Cortana Intelligence Suite, a key enabler for its Intelligent Cloud agenda. Additionally, both bring a robust background of global industry experience, having successfully run several services businesses and practices during their combined tenure at Accenture.
Laurence Marks
“David and John’s experience driving business strategy as well as near and long-term delivery of our key metrics will enhance how our organization better serves our clients—ultimately providing the personalized shopping and service experience innovative businesses are requesting,” said Laurence Marks, CEO of Roobot. “We are excited to have them on board and look forward to accelerating the value we deliver to our clients.”
“It’s an exciting time for digital disruption in the retail industry,” said Rich. “As emerging technologies like Artificial Intelligence (via Personal Shopping Assistants), Virtual/Augmented Reality, Predictive/Prescriptive Analytics and Unified Commerce redefine the shopper experience like never before. With a seven year head start, I’m happy to be working with someone as innovative as Roobot. We are eager to help this company continue to build and develop impactful solutions for the world’s most innovative retailers and brands.”
Roobot empowers retail brands with a white-labeled Personal Shopping & Service Assistant platform that rivals Amazon Alexa.  Brands get an advanced AI and NLP-powered Personal Shopping Assistant that delivers personalized product recommendations, loyalty offers, service at scale anytime and everywhere, all while collecting deep, actionable profile data on each user.
The Roobot solution is a customizable, turnkey solution for brands to easily deploy their own Personal Shopping Assistant on their website, social media (Facebook, Messenger), mobile (iOS, Android), in-store and personal assistants. Roobot’s data platform enables retailers to hyper-target consumers with instant notifications and retargeting to convert visitors into buyers via this new emerging sales channel. In addition, Roobot’s end-to-end solution easily integrates with any CRM or Enterprise solution, for the first time syncing existing brand user profile data with the shopping events generated in the Personal Shopping Assistant, resulting in a deeper data profile on each consumer.
Read More: Interview With Tomer Kashi, Co-Founder & CEO, SkyWatch


