FootballCoin Creates Its Own Blockchain, Rewards Initial Supporters 

25 Jan 2018

The Blockchain-Based Football Manager Game Footballcoin Is Offering a 3:1 Conversion Rate For Each XFCCOIN For Initial Supporters
The cryptocurrency powered football fantasy manager game, FootballCoin was conceived in 2016 with the goal of bringing together two worlds: the cryptocurrency market and football fans worldwide. Simply put, anyone can play the game and win native XFC tokens, which can be spent either in the game or in the cryptocurrency market. The entertainment tech startup is rewarding its supporters with a 3 to 1 token conversion rate to all its XFC token holders when it switches to its own native blockchain.
XFCCOIN, the game’s cryptocurrency was initially available on a Counterparty platform.
This was a good solution at that time, but with the game gaining popularity, issues like high costs, slow speed and the difficulty of trading XFCCOIN on the exchange services had to be addressed.
Enter The New Blockchain
2018 kicked off with good news – on January 16thFootballCoin launched its very own blockchain and exchange to support XFCCOIN (from now on known simply as XFC). In addition, the new wallet will support both XFC and game assets – player cards and stadium cards.
FootballCoin analyzed other options such as moving to the Ethereum platform, which would have been easier, but would not have been a real improvement to our current situation.
For this reason, FootballCoin believed that the solution was to devise its own new user-friendly blockchain. The company contracted ANX International to develop the exchange. ANX will also provide and help manage the DigitalTokens.io exchange. It’s important to know that both the exchange and the game are set on the same blockchain.
3:1 conversion of XFCCOINS
FootballCoin will provide a 3:1 conversion of XFCCOIN from Counterparty to the new blockchain. In other words, anybody who now owns 1 XFCCOIN will receive 3 XFC when the swap to the new blockchain is implemented. If your XFCCOIN is stored in the Counterparty platform, token holders will need to move it to the game account to benefit from this conversion ratio.
Conversion of the FootballCoin assets
The conversion keeps the same ratio for the player cards regardless of rank.
For example, if a player owns a card of Harry Kane, before the transfer, they will now own three Harry Kane cards. These cards can be sold, used for the game or traded on the platform. Stadium cards owners will get to keep their cards and also receive a nice amount of XFC, as follows:
stadium cards ranked 5 stars will receive 500,000 XFC
stadium cards ranked 4 stars will receive 300,000 XFC
stadium cards ranked 3 stars will receive 150,000 XFC
For example, if you are the lucky owner of a Santiago Bernabeu stadium card, you will receive 500,000 XFC, and keep the stadium card after the swap. All conversions will start automatically on Tuesday, January 16th.
XFCCOIN and Game Economy
XFCCOIN was generated in a limited supply of 1,000,000,000 units using the Counterparty platform, and the total amount will remain unchanged after the swap. The 200 million XFCCOIN that were initially distributed will now become 600 million XFC on the new blockchain, according to the 3 to 1 swap.
The remaining 400 million units will be distributed according to the initial plan:
200 million will be assigned to further development of the project, partners, team members, advertising, promotions etc.
The other 200 million XFC will go to the founders of FootballCoin.
The swap benefit will therefore give existing XFC owners a higher stake in the FootballCoin economy. They will have the largest influence on how the market develops.
But – to quote a popular superhero franchise – with great power comes great responsibility.
They will now need to act responsibly to ensure the development of the FootballCoin economy and stimulate the growth of the game, which we are very confident they will do.
FootballCoin is a blockchain-fueled football manager platform created by Crowngem Limited, a British Virgin Islands-based company. The privately funded platform blends cryptocurrency technology with traditional fantasy sports to create a universal gaming solution for users across the world.


