Tiger Analytics Named In Gartner Market Guide For Data And Analytics Service Providers

05 Jul 2018

Tiger Analytics, a Leading AI and Advanced Analytics Consulting Firm, Has Been Listed As A Representative Vendor in Gartner’s 2018 Market Guide for Data and Analytics Service Providers
Tiger Analytics, a leading advanced analytics and AI consulting firm, announced today that they have been recognized in Gartner Inc.’s “Market Guide for Data and Analytics Service Providers”, published in June 2018. This report identifies service providers with a proven track record of delivering successful analytics programs.
Gartner notes, “The overall market outlook for data and analytics services will continue to be strong. The market is estimated at $148 billion market at a 15.4% growth in 2018, to $199 billion and 8.9% growth in 2021.” It adds, “The urgency for organizations to transform into digital businesses and to compete more effectively in the global market is forcing buyers to become more data-driven.” It also mentions, “ESPs with repeatable, robust and proven data and analytics assets can help accelerate implementations with a more predictable and measurable “asset+consulting” approach. However, such implementations are still few and far between.”
Read More: Working Together To Strengthen The Lives Of Rural Americans
Mahesh Kumar
Tiger Analytics’ CEO, Mahesh Kumar said, “From our conversations with clients, it has clearly emerged that a combination of analytics accelerators and a business consulting approach will be key to the success of enterprise analytics programs. As an organization, we have invested significantly in these areas.” Tiger Analytics has a slew of data science and data engineering accelerators that reduce project execution times – sometimes by as much as 75%. View the Tiger Analytics accelerators video to know more.
Mahesh added, “Our inclusion in the Gartner report reaffirms our position as a leading global data and analytics service provider focused on delivering significant and tangible business value to our clients. We are thrilled to be included in it.”
Tiger Analytics is an advanced analytics and AI consulting firm enabling enterprises to generate business value from data. Today, several Fortune 500 companies engage Tiger Analytics to help build cutting-edge solutions and bring in a machine learning and AI perspective to address their business challenges.
Read More: World Cup 2018: Avid Maestro Graphics Systems Give AR Capabilities For Globo’s Coverage


