Nudge.ai Expands Horizons In Relationship Intelligence With New Tool For Sales

16 May 2018

To Grow Their Expertise in Relationship Intelligence, Nudge.ai Responds to Google’s Launch of ‘Nudges’
Nudge.ai, the leading relationship intelligence platform, has advanced its solution that empowers businesses to build relationships at scale. As Google announces a ‘smart reply’ feature to Gmail, Nudge.ai has launched intelligent follow-up cadences that set and manage reminders based on relationship strength, and smart templates that allow instant personalization of email outreach.
With the new features, Nudge.ai now enables sales teams to set follow-up cadences to keep in touch with prospects and accounts.
Nudge.ai cadences are intelligent: they function on intervals – for example, two weeks or three months – automatically tracking if a rep or company is in touch, and displaying reminders only if they are not in touch with a prospect or account. The cadences display where sales teams already work, including in Gmail, Outlook, Salesforce, SalesLoft, and Outreach. Reminders clear automatically once a new touch is made, as Nudge.ai tracks any relationship activity directly from the source, including email, phone, and calendar.
Recommended Read: The ‘Fearless Marketer’ Captures The Essence of the Marketo Nation Summit 2018
Nudge.ai helps salespeople access new accounts, analyze deal risk, and measure account health – powered by relationship intelligence required to build faster network relationships. 
Plus, Nudge.ai now also provides smart templates to engage prospects based on persona. These templates make outreach easier and faster. It takes sales teams one-click to customize an email based on a buying persona. Nudge.ai also provides AI-powered sales insights directly inside the email to make personalizing outreach easy.
via Nudge.ai
Currently, Nudge.ai helps sales teams to access new accounts, analyze deal risk, and measure account health. Nudge.ai integrates with the tools that sales teams already use including Gmail, Outlook, Salesforce, SalesLoft, and Outreach.
Read More: Ask Yourself, What’s Bringing Audience to Your Website?


