XDBS Founder Kartik Anand Wins Asia’s Greatest Brands & Leaders 2017 Award

13 Feb 2018

Kartik Anand, Founder and Executive Chairman of XDBS, Was Awarded Asia’s Greatest Leader Award; XDBs Was Awarded Asia’s Greatest Brand Award
Kartik Anand, Founder and Executive Chairman of XDBS, was awarded Asia’s Greatest Leader Award. XDBs was awarded Asia’s Greatest Brand Award at the glittering ceremony, held at the Marina Bay Sands Hotel in Singapore, which was attended by dignitaries from across Asia.
Kartik Anand
XDBS is tech firm that is focused on B2B marketing and lead generation and has a proven track record for helping publishers, agencies, and technology companies execute their marketing and media plans successfully. They have built high ROI solutions for their clients and have engaged at multiple levels to provide them with Marketing and Sales Ready Leads.
The second edition of Asia’s Greatest Brands & Leaders 2017 held at the Roselle Junior Ballroom of Marina Bay Sands Expo and Conventions Centre, Singapore on Jan 29, 2017. The event was a magnificent success, highlighted by the presence of the Ukranian Ambassador, His Excellency Dmytro Senik, and several other top business dignitaries.
Several business-related issues were discussed, and ways to improve investment in Asia were considered. The Summit was organized by URS-AsiaOne magazine and UWG Media Consulting P.L. a rapidly emerging media company that covers business, politics and social issues across Asia. This enables them to support the Indian Government’s initiatives such as Skilling India, Digitising India, and Incredible India, and also the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals and the World Health Organisation’s targets.
PricewaterhouseCoopers were the process reviewers for the 2nd Edition of Asia’s Greatest Brands & Leaders 2017 Which included the Asia’s Greatest Leader and Asia’s Greatest brand Awards, AsiaOne’s 40 Most Influential Asians Under 40, Asia’s Greatest CEOs, CFOs, CMOs, CHROs  and CTOs Awards and Top Women Achievers of the Year 2017 Awards.
Rajat Shukal, Global Head of URS Media Consulting P.L. and AsiaOne Magazine, said that the Second Edition of Asia’s Greatest Brands & Leaders 2017 had proved to be a milestone in creating a platform to address the pressing business and social causes of the world.
Also Read:  XDBS Appoints Julie Strong as CEO


