Decentralized News Network (DNN) Announces VIDL News Executives Greg D’Alba And Charles Theiss To Join DNN Advisory Board

12 Jul 2018

Decentralized News Network (“DNN”), the world’s first blockchain ecosystem for decentralized news reporting and distribution, announces that Greg D’Alba and Charles Theiss from VIDL News Corp. have joined DNN’s advisory board.
Former CNN executives, D’Alba and Theiss will provide strategic recommendations and advice to DNN’s executive team. “We are so pleased to assist the DNN executive team with the development and launch of the next generation technology platform to support independent, accurate news reporting and journalism. The DNN platform will be guided by the quest for factual reporting by infusing professional journalism, disruptive technology, and consumer collaboration,” remarked Greg D’Alba.
Samit Singh
DNN founder and CEO Samit Singh commented, “Greg and Charles are leaders and visionaries in the news industry. We are thrilled and privileged to welcome them as members of our talent-packed advisory board.”
Follow Us
Greg D’Alba served as the President & Chief Operating Officer of CNN News Networks where he oversaw CNN portfolio of networks and Turner’s digital group of news, entertainment, sports and animation properties. D’Alba has extensive leadership experience having served as President of Global Partnerships for WME/IMG and currently the CEO of VIDL News Corp.
Charles Theiss served as Senior Vice President of CNN advertising sales and managed CNN’s digital advertising sales, business development and ad operations. He held senior leadership positions with major media organizations including Terra Lycos, Looksmart, and FX and is currently the Chief Operating Officer of VIDL News Corp.
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
“DNN’s ecosystem of journalists, reviewers, and readers is a game changer for news. The community based ecosystem will bring back the public’s trust by third-party authentication of news stories, social media posts and external data providing users with accurate verified information,” said D’Alba.
Theiss added, “The DNN blockchain technology will democratize access to accurate fact based information informing global citizens and impacting policy and public sentiment across the world.”
The DNN self-sustaining decentralized news ecosystem offers their global community of journalists, reviewers and readers the access to participate within a transparent accountable platform with no central authority. DNN will introduce a token based economy to serve two purposes: reward and/or compensate contributions, and to recognize utility driven actions within the ecosystem.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc


