How Organizations Can Balance Machine And Human Intelligence

23 Jan 2018

onas Prising And  Will.i.am Will Host A Panel At The World Economic Forum Annual Meeting in Davos To Explore What Is Required To Lead Through Digital Transformation
ManpowerGroup launches new report — From C-Suite to Digital Suite, How to Lead Through Digital Transformation — with a robust panel discussion at the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting in Davos. Jonas Prising, ManpowerGroup Chairman & CEO, and tech entrepreneur Will.i.am will host a panel featuring global business experts that challenge traditional ideas of effective leadership and explore what is required to lead through digital transformation.
The debate will include one of WEF’s most distinguished champions and WPP CEO Sir Martin Sorrell, Will.i.am, Dow Chairman and CEO Andrew Liveris, Cognizant CEO Francisco D’Souza, KPMG’s Head of People Susan Ferrier and IBM Watson Chief David Kenny. The discussion will be moderated by Financial Times U.S. Managing Editor Gillian Tett.
When almost 9 out of 10 HR leaders do not believe they have the leadership talent to drive success in the digital era, leaders of every size and sector need to lead differently to capture opportunity and stay relevant.
Jonas Prising
“What got us here won’t get us there. Current and future leaders in the digital age must be open to change and ready to take calculated risks,” said Prising. “The good news is leading through digital transformation does not mean a complete replacement of the makeup of strong leadership. Instead the 80/20 rule applies. Foundational leadership skills like endurance and adaptability continue to be critical. Yet in the digital age, effective leaders must also nurture the additional 20 percent — unleashing talent, daring to lead, and at times failing, fast; all to accelerate performance. We are pleased to be joined by such diverse and expert speakers to discuss how to keep businesses running smoothly with one hand, while preparing for a different and uncertain future with the other.”
The report poses four key questions organizations should answer to develop a transformation ready leadership team.
Are our development programs designed to nurture and advance future digital leaders?
Does my leadership team and talent pipeline possess the inherent enablers and coachable capabilities to drive successful transformation in the digital age?
Are we creating a culture of innovation?
Are we using the right criteria to identify future leaders?
ManpowerGroup, the leading global workforce solutions company, helps organizations transform in a fast-changing world of work by sourcing, assessing, developing and managing the talent that enables them to win. We develop innovative solutions for over 400,000 clients and connect 3+ million people to meaningful, sustainable work across a wide range of industries and skills. Our expert family of brands – Manpower, Experis, Right Management and ManpowerGroup Solutions – creates substantially more value for candidates and clients across 80 countries and territories and has done so for nearly 70 years. In 2017, ManpowerGroup was named one of the World’s Most Ethical Companies for the seventh consecutive year and one of Fortune’s Most Admired Companies, confirming our position as the most trusted and admired brand in the industry.


