SingularityNET And Project Shivom Collaborate For Secure, Scalable Personalized Medical Analytics

25 Jun 2018

SingularityNET’s Bio-AI Team Is Supporting Research Into The Genomics Of Longevity And Maximizing The Human Lifespan
SingularityNET, a blockchain-based platform and marketplace for artificial intelligence, is collaborating with Project Shivom, a genomic data-hub powered by blockchain technology. Together, SingularityNET and Shivom will pursue AI-driven genomic and medical analytics, bringing blockchain, AI and genomics together into a single cross-disciplinary, decentralized information-theoretic technology.
Ben Goertzel
“We are excited about Shivom’s vision for the next era of genomics, and are happy to be working with them,” said SingularityNET CEO Dr. Ben Goertzel. “Tools must be developed to enable AI and other analysis of genomics data, without the researcher necessarily being able to view the entirety of the individual’s genetic makeup and medical situation.”
“The questionable relationship between the UK government and Google Deep Mind Health, for example, highlights the need for decentralized medical big data and AI,” continued Dr. Goertzel. “What we see here is a centralized government medical system dancing to the tune of a big, centralized AI/data company. Who will own the deep knowledge about human life and death, and health, disease and body function – which AI is going to discover by analyzing the world’s biomedical data? This is precisely what is at stake.”
Regarding how the connection would work, a Shivom-based data brokering service could store clients’ encrypted genomic and other medical data, along with any restrictions on the type of research they would wish to participate in, and any desired compensation requirements. A human medical researcher, or an AI agent operating within SingularityNET, could then request a data set of given type, size and quality. If the data was available, it would then be compiled and relayed to a service providing encrypted algorithms, which would produce the results of the desired analysis – without the individual subjects’ data ever being exposed to the researcher.
SingularityNET’s bio-AI team is now involved with a number of research projects regarding the genomics of longevity, with an aim of supporting medical research aimed at maximizing the healthy human lifespan.  In a recent post from the company’s AI Research Lab, Dr. Goertzel and Michael Duncan of Hong Kong bioinformatics firm Mozi AI Health outlined how SingularityNET is applying an integrated AI approach to build an automated regenerative medicine system. Along with Shivom, SingularityNET has also partnered with Mozi AI Health, which has created a biology-specific customization of the open-source OpenCog framework.
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?
The collaboration with Shivom is expected to add value by providing a volume of high-quality data, a customer base for SingularityNET biomedical analytics services, and integration with Shivom’s unique genomics focused software platform.
“A key focus for SingularityNET’s bio-AI team is the creation of AI services carrying out genomic, proteomic and clinical analysis using tools from OpenCog,” said Dr. Goertzel. “Integrating a number of biomedical reference databases, these solutions can offer classification and diagnostic models, as well as useful insights and explanations of the key genes and processes influencing AI decisions. Integration of Shivom’s tools and data into the network should add yet more scope and intelligence.”
Once the integration is complete, an AI agent on SingularityNET that needs genomic or other biological data to do its work will be able to request this from Shivom. Similarly, if a Shivom customer desires AI analytics to be performed on data they have uploaded, or on data others have uploaded and made available on reasonable terms, then the Shivom network will be able to request this from SingularityNET.
SingularityNET and Shivom expect to create the underpinnings of these services, along with multiple further innovations in AI-driven genomic and medical analytics.
Along with biomedical analytics, SingularityNET is building initial AI solutions serving a number of other important application areas, including network analysis, social media analytics and social robotics.
SingularityNET’s core goal is to provide an intelligent fabric for AI algorithms to talk to each other — and in doing so, to provide both a teeming commercial marketplace for advanced AI solutions across vertical markets, and the basis for the emergence of the world’s first true Artificial General Intelligence. The SingularityNET founders believe in open source and decentralized control, so that no single individual, corporation, or government will be able to dominate AI as it becomes increasingly more generally intelligent and capable.
Project Shivom is powering the next era of genomics through blockchain technology – protecting identity, personalizing healthcare and transforming lives. For the first time ever, a precision medicine ecosystem will offer an open web-marketplace for other providers to add not only genomics information, but also analytics, and associated apps and services to drive personalized medicine. We further aim to extend our services to form a global network of laboratories and research centers, as well as genetic counselors and other relevant services.
Read More: Interview With Dorian Selz, Co-Founder & CEO, Squirro


