“At The World AI Show, The Priority Is Not To Sell But Generate Awareness” – Mohammed Saleem, CEO, Trescon

02 Apr 2018

The #WorldAIShow Is Another Notch In The Dubai Government’s Efforts To Turn The Emirate Into A Living Laboratory For Nascent Technology
The United Arab Emirates is in a race to brand itself as the AI capital of the world. It has already taken steps in this direction when, in October of 2017, it announced a Ministry of AI with His Excellency Omar bin Sultan Al Olama declared the minister in-charge.
Omar bin Sultan Al Olama
His responsibilities include enhancing the government’s performance by investing in the latest technologies and AI tools and applying them in various sectors.
It is no surprise then that the World AI Show is supported by the Dubai Police.
Dubai plays host to dozens of emerging AI startups and digital transformative technologies. The country’s market cap for AI is set to touch  US$ 50 Billion by 2025. Neighbouring countries like Saudi Arabia and Qatar have also developed a keenness for AI.
A number of countries are investing heavily in AI. China recently announced plans to build a $2.1 billion research park dedicated to AI development, and said it wants to be the world leader in the technology by 2030. But if UAE’s history is anything to go by; the competition is about to get tougher.
Mohammed Saleem, CEO of Trescon
AiThority spoke to Mohammed Saleem, CEO of Trescon and founder of World AI Show to learn more;
Tell us about yourself and why you decided to reinvent the technology event space after more than a decade in the industry?
Mohammed Saleem: Most people are comfortable with the big salary and secured lifestyle. I call this discomfort. I saw a gap in the B2B events space. There was a visible lack in summits and events which addressed futuristic technologies that were on the rise. A moment of clarity saw my entrepreneurial blood boil, and I decided to leave my comfort zone and start Trescon.
So much has changed with the way organizers and attendees approach trade shows; how do you see advancements in technology affecting the events space in the immediate future?
Our shows are fuelled by innovations and the conversations that surround them. The future of our events and the entire techno-event ecosphere is defined by the progress in the respective field, be it AI or blockchain. So with the advent of a new technology and its advantageous possibilities, we will only see an increase in the attendance at these events.
Why did you identify AI and more specifically Blockchain as the next disruptive technology to base Trescon’s statement events?
To be very frank, we do not know what the future holds. Everyday something new comes by and sweeps everyone off their feet. Blockchain and AI are the hottest topics and moreover, they are platforms which keeps giving rise to innovations and inventions. So I felt it was the right direction for Trescon to progress towards, for now. The future is still young.
Tell us about emerging markets and how geographies are evolving when it comes to tech businesses.
Mohammed Saleem: The best example for this answer would be the Middle Eastern market. A few years ago, everyone thought the Arab world was only focused on the crude oil market.
The creation of a dedicated ministry for AI in Dubai, headed by his highness Sultan Bin AlOlama, is an example of how rumoured regressive markets are now coming forward to innovate and improve the quality of life within their own country. With this, neighbouring countries such as Saudi Arabia and Qatar are developing AI and blockchain as well.
If I had told you this 20 years ago, we all would have had a good laugh.
Read More: Look Who’s Attending #WorldAIShow, Dubai Edition
Blockchain and cyrptocurrency are the new buzzwords that everyone seems to be associating with. How does this negatively, if at all, affect the community and stakeholders?
I see no negativity in innovative technologies. If investors and shareholders react negatively to these technologies, then they have missed the boat to the future. The community, on the other hand, only has to benefit from these technologies.
What do you think should be the next steps for the community of entrepreneurs and technologists driving the blockchain movement to ensure a stable future?
A stable future with these technologies can only be ensured with the right education and by building awareness. And all this happens at summits, like World Blockchain Summit or World AI Show, where the priority is not to sell but generate awareness.
What can we look forward to at the World AI Show?
At World AI Show, you can look forward to some exciting and thought-provoking panel discussions and tech-talks by a vast line of influential speakers and premier AI experts from across the globe, as well as the official presence of the Dubai Police. We’re going to make it the Middle East’s biggest AI Show.
About Trescon: Trescon is a global business events and consulting firm that provides a wide range of business services to a diversified client base. We produce highly focused B2B events that connect businesses with opportunities through conferences, road shows, expos, demand generation and consulting services. 


