XPRIZE Foundation’s Peter Diamandis Joins Guardium Token Sale As Advisor And Participant To Support Decentralized Emergency Response

30 May 2018

Innovation Pioneer Known For His Work to Solve Global Problems Backs Guardian Circle To Reinvent 911 Emergency Response
Guardian Circle, the first global, decentralized emergency response system, today announced Peter Diamandis, XPRIZE Foundation Founder and CEO, has joined the startup’s Guardium ($GDM) token sale as an advisor and participant. The Guardian Circle platform gives users in an emergency situation immediate access to a designated circle of trusted friends, family and neighbors located closest to the crisis, significantly reducing the emergency response time and improving a victim’s chances for survival. Guardians who respond to requests for help are then rewarded in Guardium tokens, which can be redeemed for more services or sold for fiat currency.
Diamandis is an innovation visionary who has founded or co-founded 19 entrepreneurial ventures, including Singularity University, Human Longevity Inc., International Space University, and Planetary Resources. He launched the XPRIZE Foundation in 1994, which leads the world in designing and operating large-scale incentive competitions for “radical breakthroughs” that benefit humanity. XPRIZE is currently teaming with IBM to offer the IBM Watson AI XPRIZE, which in 2020 will give $5 million to the artificial intelligence system that gives the best TED Talk. Diamandis is also an engineer and Harvard University-trained physician, and in 2014, he was named one of Fortune’s World’s 50 Greatest Leaders. He advocates the importance of living with an abundance mindset.
Mark Jeffrey
“We are humbled and honored to earn the endorsement of one of the most influential names in innovation today,” said Mark Jeffrey, Co-founder and CEO of Guardian Circle.
Peter Diamandis
“After learning of the immediate impact Guardium can offer its users and the alliances Mark has built around him, it was an obvious fit for me and the work I do,” said Peter Diamandis. “I look forward to working closely with Mark and his team, to save more lives and change the world for the better.”
Available for free on iOS, Apple Watch, Android and Alexa, Guardian Circle is currently used by tens-of-thousands and has established partnerships with Anu and Naveen Jain Women’s Safety XPRIZE, Upchannel, Bee Token, and 0Chain. The app was recently named as a finalist in Fast Company’s World Changing Ideas Awards.


