Socialbakers Analytics Report Predicts A France Versus England Final?

10 Jul 2018

With Belgium and Croatia lagging far behind, could this mean we have our World Cup finalists written in the social media stats?
The semi-finals kick-off today!
FIFA World Cup 2018 — the most watched live sports event on the planet is down to the semi-finalists fighting it out. With three matches to go to decide the World Champions in Russia, social media is bursting with excitements and fan-fights. With the top contenders out, it’s mostly left to choosing a team that has the most recent experience of winning the Cup- France.
Based on social media interactions, according to Socialbakers, France are hot favorites to win the FIFA World Cup for the second time in twenty years.
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
Socialbakers has recently released the report titled “2018 Social Media World Cup“.
In an hour’s time, Belgium would be contesting against Les Bleus to enter their maiden Final. Yet, we haven’t taken our eyes off what’s happening in Martech and FIFA- related analytics. Based on social media interactions, according to Socialbakers, France is going to win it for the second time in twenty years.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc
Here’s a quick snapshot of what transpired from social media analytics.
Semi-final Analytics from Socialbakers
Among the semi-finalists, France is still on top with over 4 million interactions, followed by the English team. Though England is nipping at their heels, having racked up 1.2 million interactions since their last win in the quarter-finals, they have a tougher fight against the ’98 semi-finalists, Croatia.
England players also had a strong weekend on social, with Harry Kane bumping Toni Kroos to take 4th place by doubling his overall interactions in just 5 days.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
View image on Twitter
Harry Kane
@HKane
That feeling when you’ve got a World Cup semi final tomorrow… #WorldCup #ThreeLions #ENG
4:35 PM – Jul 10, 2018
37.8K
4,199 people are talking about this
Twitter Ads info and privacy
And Dele Alli didn’t only score on the pitch but also on social media, jumping three places to 13th with almost 250,000 interactions over the weekend.
The England team’s emotional celebrations both on the pitch and on social media clearly played into the hearts and minds of their fans – let’s see what Wednesday brings…
Red Devils Era
@RedDevilsEra
FIFA World Cup 2018 Semifinal

France vs Belgium Trailer
10:40 PM - Jul 9, 2018
138
58 people are talking about this
Twitter Ads info and privacy
Read More: How “System Mindfulness” Is Changing The FMCG Industry


