Daimler And Mizmaa Ventures Co-Lead Round B At Anagog – The Mobility Status AI Innovator

26 Feb 2018

Anagog Ltd, developers of the mobility status AI engine and big data analytics solutions, announced the initial closing phase of its Series-B round of financing. The round is being co-led by Daimler AG, the automotive OEM, and Mizmaa Ventures, a California-HK based VC, specializing in artificial intelligence, machine learning, and big data venture investments.
“We are very pleased and honored to welcome Daimler and Mizmaa as our new investors,” said Ofer Tziperman, CEO of Anagog. “Our ongoing business collaboration with Daimler has been a perfect opportunity to recognize the mutual synergies between Anagog’s array of mobility innovations and Daimler’s long-term vision of mobility services. We are also delighted to have the experienced team of Mizmaa on-board. Their intimate knowledge of our potential markets will be a superb asset for Anagog. We are working with our Round B co-leaders to conclude this financing round with more lucrative investors that can help drive forward our vision for mobility innovation.”
“We want to provide not only our customers, but all smartphone owners with the best digital services. We improve every digital touchpoint in the mobility behavior of our customers and thus increase the independence of our customers,” says Sabine Scheunert, Vice President of Digital and IT for Marketing & Sales Mercedes-Benz Cars. “The investment in Anagog brings us a lot closer to this goal.”
Isaac Applbaum Founder & General Partner of Mizmaa Ventures added “Our investment in Anagog complements Mizmaa’s drive to invest in cutting-edge technologies that can significantly impact their respective industries. We are impressed by Anagog’s team of experts in machine learning, data science, signal processing, and low-level programing. Their deep understanding of smartphones, IoT hardware, and operating systems is a huge benefit. We are confident their technology is ideally-suited to several key domains, including transportation, mobile networks, banking, insurance and AdTech.”
Analyzing multiple on-handset sensor signals, Anagog’s technology provides a more accurate view of real-time and predictive mobility status for the handset’s owner – combined with ultra-low power consumption. On-handset analysis and contextual data can be used to significantly enhance the user’s experience with richer contextual services, at the right time and place. Anagog’s patented technology is a game changer in the field of on-handset independent artificial intelligence engines. It has the potential to change the way privacy is being handled by service providers and offer users better control over their data.
Using Anagog’s technology, supervised and unsupervised machine learning algorithms work on-handset to achieve the highest number of real-time and predictive mobility statuses per user. This cutting-edge technology opens-up a wide array of new opportunities for service providers. With the introduction of more personalized and engaging tools, the era of ‘one-size-fits-all’ mobile services is now formally over.
Read Also: Interview With Tomer Kashi, Co-Founder & CEO, SkyWatch


