Conversica Partners With Microsoft To Bring Conversational AI To Microsoft Dynamics 365

25 Apr 2018

Conversica’s AI-Powered Sales Assistants Now Available on Microsoft AppSource to Help Microsoft Marketing and Sales Customers Automatically Convert More Leads Into Sales Opportunities
Conversica, the leader in conversational AI for business, announced that its AI-based sales assistant technology is now deeply integrated with Microsoft Dynamics 365 and is available from the Microsoft AppSource online marketplace.
The Conversica AI Sales assistant integrated with Microsoft Dynamics 365 enables Microsoft customers to easily leverage Conversica’s state-of-the-art conversational AI technology to automatically follow up with leads in their CRM and marketing automation systems. Conversica assistants, powered by advanced natural language processing and machine learning technology, carry on natural, two-way conversations with leads to engage and qualify them for sales. This automated lead follow-up ensures that 100 percent of marketing’s leads are contacted 100 percent of the time and results in more meetings and, thus, more opportunities for sales.
Victor Belfor
“Microsoft Dynamics 365 customers are some of the most sophisticated marketing and sales teams; however, they can still struggle with ensuring all the leads generated by marketing are qualified and handed off to sales at the right time,” commented Victor Belfor, Senior Vice President of Business Development of Conversica. “With the powerful integration of Conversica’s conversational AI and Microsoft Dynamics 365, these customers are now able to eliminate the lead qualification bottleneck, boost pipeline creation for sales, and deliver more ROI on marketing demand generation investment. The partnership between Conversica and Microsoft creates this win-win combination for our joint customers.”
Coming soon, Microsoft customers will be able to access the Conversica listing in the Microsoft AppSource marketplace to access detailed information on the integration and begin utilizing Conversica AI assistant technology with Microsoft Dynamics 365, in both the cloud and on-premise versions.
Conversica is the leader in AI-powered business conversations and the only provider of AI-driven lead engagement software for marketing and sales organizations. The flagship Conversica® AI Sales Assistant helps companies find and secure customers more quickly and efficiently by automatically contacting, engaging, qualifying and following up with leads via natural, two-way conversations.


