RightHand Robotics: MODEX 2018 Site Of Automated Piece-Picking World Record

20 Apr 2018

RightPick Booth Demonstrations Successfully Pick And Place More Than 130,000 Items
RightHand Robotics, a leader in robotic piece-picking solutions, announced that a team of automation partners joined to set a world record at MODEX, the largest supply chain event in North and South America.
RightPick workcells successfully picked and placed 131,072 items over the duration of the show at the Georgia World Congress Center. The workcells were featured in five exhibitor booths at the show, enabling partner companies to showcase how robotic piece-picking increases the value of their respective solutions for e-commerce fulfillment and intralogistics.
“We wanted to set a benchmark for piece-picking performance, and the show was a fantastic opportunity for it. We are grateful to our partners: Eurosort, Vecna Robotics, White Systems, and Universal Robots for helping us establish this record,” said Yaro Tenzer, co-founder of RightHand Robotics. “Our robots handle a wide range of everyday items at high throughput rates, delivering the reliability required by our customers, and sharing the final results from our MODEX fleet is a fun way to illustrate this point.”
Esben Østergaard
RightHand’s team of four deployment engineers set up multiple workcells at the show in a day. Utilizing robots from Universal Robots, the cells were integrated with sortation systems, automated storage and retrieval systems (AS/RS) and mobile robots at partner booths across both halls at the exhibition. “We are pleased that our collaborative robots were the workhorses behind this record performance,” said Esben Østergaard, CTO at Universal Robots.
Depending on the workflow, the RightHand systems achieved pick rates up to 1,000 units per hour across an assortment of items, including products that the system had never seen before. “Robotic piece-picking is easy to deploy and can provide predictable capacity for our customers and those of our integration partners,” added Tenzer.
RightPick is a hardware-enabled software solution that handles the key task of picking individual items in a variety of workflows within e-commerce order fulfillment centers, distribution centers and other warehouse and production environments. With RightPick, businesses can reduce costs and improve reliability of the fulfillment process for pharmaceuticals, electronics, grocery, apparel, and many other industries. Unlike traditional factory robots, RightPick handles tens of thousands of different items using a machine learning backend coupled with an intelligent gripper that works in concert with industry-leading robotic arms.
RightHand Robotics is a pioneer in providing robotic piece-picking solutions that improve performance and efficiency in e-commerce order fulfillment and intralogistics. We focus on delivering systems that meet customer needs as measured by the “three Rs” of automated piece-picking – range of items, rate and reliability. RHR was founded in 2014 by a DARPA challenge-winning team from the Harvard Biorobotics Lab, the Yale GRAB Lab, and MIT intent on bringing grasping intelligence to bear on real world problems.


