Vyasa Analytics Introduces Deep Learning Software For Life Sciences And Healthcare

23 Jan 2018

Using Vyasa’s Proprietary Neural Concept Recognition Technology, Cortex Identifies Concepts And Their Relationships Across Disparate Data Sources – Often Called Dark Or Siloed Data – Without The Need For Complex Reformatting, Integration Or Warehousing Efforts
Vyasa Analytics, a provider of deep learning software and analytics for life sciences and healthcare organizations, announced the launch of Cortex, a secure, highly scalable software platform for collaborative knowledge discovery and data analytics. Cortex applies a range of artificial intelligence approaches (AI) to organizational data, empowering project teams to gain insights and drive better decision making.
Using Vyasa’s proprietary Neural Concept Recognition technology, Cortex identifies concepts and their relationships across disparate data sources – often called dark or siloed data – without the need for complex reformatting, integration or warehousing efforts. For life sciences, this includes information about therapeutics, genes, proteins, types of diseases and more. In healthcare, Cortex can help organizations create better diagnoses, reduce readmissions and side effects, understand symptoms, cut costs and increase efficiency.
Christopher Bouton
“Organizations generate and consume so much digital data now that it is impossible for knowledge workers to read through all the information relevant to decisions in their daily work,” said Christopher Bouton, Ph.D., founder and CEO, Vyasa. “Cortex can identify the patterns and correlations relevant to sets of concepts across disparate data types by recognizing and extracting this information directly from data sources. In the same way that it enables recognition of objects in images, deep learning revolutionizes how we can conduct analytics by making concept recognition in data something that the machine can do for us.”
MilliporeSigma, a global leader in life science, is working with Vyasa to incorporate deep learning analytics into how it collaborates with customers.
Udit Batra
“Deep learning is a compelling area of research with vast opportunities to change the way we solve problems in life science,” said Udit Batra, CEO, MilliporeSigma. “Through our work with Vyasa, we are exploring how we can apply Cortex technology within our business.”
In 2016, the pharmaceutical industry spent some $157 billion on research and development. This figure is set to increase to over $180 billion by 2022. The healthcare analytics market was $8.69 billion by 2016 and is estimated to reach $33.38 billion by 2022. Cortex is positioned to capture hundreds of millions of dollars in these markets by allowing organizations to conduct analytics on data relevant to their research. Other analytics companies in the space experiencing rapid growth include Lattice.io (acquired by Apple for $200 million), BenevolentAI (valued at $1.7 billion) and Exscientia (recent deals with GSK for $43 million and Sanofi for $273 million).
Dr. Bouton earned his Ph.D. in Molecular Neurobiology from Johns Hopkins University and sold his first big data software company, Entagen, to Thompson Reuters in 2013. Living in India for four years as a boy, he developed a great respect for Vyasa – an important Hindu figure, storyteller and compiler of information – and believes that AI approaches will help us better compile and gain insights from our data systems.
Vyasa Analytics provides deep learning software and analytics for life sciences and healthcare organizations. Cortex is Vyasa’s secure, highly scalable software platform for collaborative knowledge discovery and data analytics. Using Vyasa’s proprietary Neural Concept Recognition technology, Cortex identifies trends and patterns across disparate data sources, empowering project teams to gain insights and drive better decision making.


