Pegasystems Launches Pega Community To Empower Anyone To Create Better Software

07 Jun 2018

New Community Fosters Collaborative Approach To Developing Pega Apps For Both Experienced And New Developers
Pegasystems Inc. the software company empowering customer engagement at the world’s leading enterprises, today announced Pega Community, an open online community empowering Pega users of all experience levels to build better software without coding. This new community allows anyone – from novice to expert – to access the latest resources and tutorials to unlock the power of Pega Infinity™, Pega’s next-generation digital transformation suite.
As organizations race to digitally transform their businesses, people with the skills to rapidly create the required solutions are in high demand. Pega Community aims to change how software gets built and redefine who gets to build it by providing an engaging educational resource for Pega’s no-code development environment. From business users to veteran developers, the site offers valuable resources to quickly drive successful digital transformation projects from start to finish. Members can stay current with Pega technology, enhance existing skills, and take their careers to the next level. Pega Community allows developers to network with each other to share ideas and discuss projects, while providing Pega clients with a prime resource to find people with the necessary skills needed for their next project.
Read More: Interview With Jeff Gallino, Founder And CTO, CallMiner
Pega Community is open today and offers the following:
Pega Launchpad: New Pega users can engage with several core ‘missions’ to help familiarize them with Pega and accelerate their learning – at their own pace. These missions include a look at key Pega capabilities such as artificial intelligence (AI) and robotics; designing effective applications to meet users’ goals; tips on leveraging Pega Community; and more. Users will soon be able to earn badges they can attach to their profiles as they complete courses, learn new skills, and quickly gain confidence to develop solutions on their own.
Pega Community Profiles and ”Find a Pega Pro”: Newly expanded profile pages enable Pega Community members to build their personal Pega brand and connect with other developers and potential employers. Profiles include project history, areas of expertise, and availability status for new projects. Additionally, users can showcase their achievements with their official verified Pega certifications, as well as badges earned from completing courses, attending events and seminars, demonstrating product knowledge, and more. Through the new “Find a Pega Pro” tool, Pega’s industry-leading clients – representing some of the most successful companies in the world – can search within their own organizations to find available Pega developers who match the skills and qualifications they’re seeking. This tool will help Pega Community members looking for their next project to market their skills and find exciting new career opportunities.
Project Hub: Project Hub gives users a comprehensive, centralized source of information, guidance, and tools needed to run successful Pega projects. These continuously updated resources – from basic to advanced articles, to templates and role-specific resources – bolster success by helping users accelerate projects, ensure app quality and relevance, and drive agility. The information is structured around the project lifecycle and key capabilities for fast and easy reference. For the first time, users have access to all the delivery insights cultivated from more than 35 years of Pega consulting projects.
Read More: How Can Chatbots Add Value To Customer Experience?
Pega Community will be debuted during today’s keynote presentation at PegaWorld — Pega’s annual conference being held through June 6 in Las Vegas.
Don Schuerman
“The definition of a developer has changed – it no longer exclusively refers to seasoned professionals with deep coding experience. People of all experience levels need to be empowered to create applications that help their organizations achieve their digital transformation goals,” said Don Schuerman, chief technology officer and vice president, product marketing, Pegasystems. “Pega Community aims to change how software is built and who gets to build it by enabling all users to create and implement successful projects that can transform individuals’ careers and their organizations.”
Pegasystems Inc. is the leader in software for customer engagement and operational excellence. Pega’s adaptive, cloud-architected software – built on its unified Pega Platform™ – empowers people to rapidly deploy and easily extend and change applications to meet strategic business needs. Over its 35-year history, Pega has delivered award-winning capabilities in CRM and BPM, powered by advanced artificial intelligence and robotic automation, to help the world’s leading brands achieve breakthrough business results.
Read More: Do You Have A Response Plan In Case Of A Data Breach Under GDPR?


