Round-up CES 2018: The Next-gen Of Tech

12 Jan 2018

The Holy Ground For Innovators And Breakthrough Technologies For 50 Years Did Not Disappoint; Here’s A Cheatsheet Of The Talking Points
Mind-Controlled Industrial Robot
BrainCo, a brain-machine interface (BMI) startup incubated in the Harvard Innovation Lab, revealed a BMI integrated robotic arm at CES 2018, gaining attention from a variety of news sources.
BMI technology allows direct communications between the human brains and external devices. Since its inception in the early 1920s, this technology has gradually matured over the past 100 years and has gained support from governments around the world. In 2013, the Obama administration announced The White House BRAIN Initiative to encourage BMI research. Later on, the EU, China, Japan and other countries have all proposed their own plans to support brain science and BMI research.
BrainCo develops brain-machine interface (BMI) hardware and software platform technologies. These convert brain signals into digital signals and let users better understand their focus abilities. It can also provide users with neurofeedback training techniques to develop their brain’s potential. These technologies are currently applied in the education and healthcare fields. For the first time ever, a BMI company has brought a brainwave-based education software platform to market. BrainCo has already sold tens of thousands of devices with its first order.
A Toy Drone Named Tello
Ryze Tech, a drone start-up, has completed development of its first intelligent toy drone called the Tello. The Tello is a toy drone that balances fun, form and function, with the goal to provide a fun and awesome flying experience for kids and the kid in every adult. Weighing around 80g with a body that is approximately the size of a smartwatch, it can be activated with a quick toss and return to land in the palm of your hands in a matter of seconds.
Tello houses an HD camera and comes with a pre-programmed one-touch flight function called “EZ Shot”, letting you capture a 360 video, fly in a circle and command Tello to fly “Up & Out” seamlessly. Now you can spend more time posing for the camera and capture amazing footage, and less time controlling it. Whether you’re doing a flip, tossing it into the air or racing it through an obstacle course, controlling the Tello is made simple thanks to the advanced computer vision and stabilization technology that’s packed inside.
All you’ll need is the Tello app on your smartphone, connect them through Wi-Fi and the fun of flight is at your fingertips.
Wearable Bluetooth Thermometer 
TempTraq
TempTraq, the first wearable, Bluetooth temperature monitor, continuously senses, records and transmits body temperature for up to 48 hours to a mobile device through its free downloadable app. And now, parents and doctors have the ability to remotely monitor real-time temperature data from anywhere through its new secure TempTraq Connect service (a secure, HIPAA-compliant service supported by the Google Healthcare Cloud Platform).
The Best of BabyTech Awards, held annually at CES® in Las Vegas, Nevada, is a one-of-a-kind competition to recognize the best-of-the-best in fertility, pregnancy and baby technology and products. Submissions were accepted from brands and products in five categories: Baby Eats, Baby Learn & Play, Baby Safety, Fertility & Pregnancy and Healthy Baby. Winners from each category were selected through a combination of esteemed judges’, including experts from the iconic Good Housekeeping Institute, and a public, online vote.
Alexa Is Getting Into Your Car
Elektrobit (EB), a leading developer of cutting-edge, embedded and connected technology solutions for the automotive industry, announced it will create solutions aimed at helping auto manufacturers integrate Alexa into the car. This integration will leverage EB’s automotive software expertise and Amazon Alexa’s voice service to enable carmakers to extend their vehicles’ onboard capabilities and leverage Alexa to provide a more holistic and natural human machine interface (HMI) experience in the car.
With the explosive rise of voice services, the car is now becoming the third space for consumers to leverage this technology outside of their homes and workplaces.
All-In-One Smart Home And Locator Solution
TrackNet, Inc., a cutting-edge LoRaWAN Internet of Things (IoT) solutions provider, today announced the launch of Tabs, the all-in-one, low-cost smart home monitoring solution at CES 2018. Managed by a simple mobile app and designed to maximize communication and awareness for families, Tabs suite of devices monitors children’s activities and pinpoints their location, ensures the security and health of the home indoors and outdoors, and protects children from inappropriate content online with Wi-Fi parental controls. Tabs provides users with peace of mind by combining all things related to home and family into a single and easy to use solution.
Other interesting releases inclue:
MySizeID : My Size’s body measurement technology, MySizeID, enables consumers to measure their body using their smartphones, allowing the application to determine the correct size for clothing purchased online. The application involves the use of a technological innovation that the Company believes will significantly reduce the margin of error experienced by consumers who purchase the wrong size online and thereby increase consumer confidence in online purchases on matters relating to size.
Vuzix Blade Smart Sunglasses:  Vuzix released is latest video on the Vuzix Blade AR Smart Glasses running Alexa which can be seen here.
“We have all seen how Alexa has transformed interaction in homes, but in today’s world, we are constantly on the go.  Having the Vuzix Blade AR Smart Sunglasses Alexa-Enabled, will allow you to not only see the digital world, but also communicate with the digital world hands free, no matter where you are,” said Alex Kelly, Director of Innovation & Strategic Partnerships, Vuzix.
 


