Higi And Health Dialog Add Real-Time Patient Data To Deliver Precision In Population Health Management Programs

14 Apr 2018

Health Insights Derived From Real-World Patient Biometric Data Enable Highly Accurate Health Risk Predictions, More Informed Health Coaching, And Precise Treatment Plans
higi, a Chicago company that operates a national network of more than 11,000 health self-screening stations for population health enablement, and Health Dialog, a leading provider of integrated population health management solutions for health plans, risk-bearing providers and self-insured employers, today announced an agreement to combine real-world patient data from higi’s national network of self-screening stations with Health Dialog’s award-winning population management programs. New data-driven health insights will help health plans, providers and employers deliver highly precise, actionable health interventions to patients, which can dramatically improve the cost and health outcomes equation.
higi makes it easier for consumers to measure, track and act on their health data through its network of 11,000 FDA-cleared health stations nationally located in grocery stores, club stores and pharmacies, including more than 2,300 Rite Aid pharmacies, operated by Health Dialog’s parent company, Rite Aid. These user-friendly and free self-serve stations help consumers gather health information such as blood pressure, pulse, weight and BMI. higi services are compliant with HIPAA regulations around data security and privacy and rigorously protected for the privacy and security of consumer data. higi allows consumers to control sharing of their data with explicit consent at the time of sharing.
Health Dialog’s powerful analytics engine, Care Pathways, will analyze the population health data collected through higi to stratify individuals into one of nine health stages based on their progression from wellness to disease. Health Dialog will use these highly precise insights to deliver personalized health interventions to help individuals prevent or delay disease progression. Programs range from intensive chronic disease management and wellness improvement to shared decision making, all delivered through telephonic health coaching, digital engagement and health education tools and resources.
“higi is thrilled to partner with Health Dialog to help targeted populations receive more personalized treatment plans through data-driven insights. We are dedicated to working with organizations, including payers, providers and employers, to provide enhanced solutions for care, and our partnership with Health Dialog will further streamline the process of connecting consumers and their data to their healthcare needs,” said Jeff Bennett, CEO of higi.
Danielle Barrera
“Today’s population health programs largely use data from health events that occurred in the past or are reported once a year by members, which limit their effectiveness,” said Danielle Barrera, chief operating officer of Health Dialog. “higi’s national network of 11,000 consumer health stations adds a continuous flow of actionable, real-time patient data into our population health management programs. This information will give us the highest level of insight into the right health interventions that can prevent and delay disease progression across the populations we manage. We believe this level of insight and precision is rare and will have a dramatic and meaningful impact on health outcomes as well as health care costs.”
higi is a population health enablement company that empowers consumers to measure, track and act on their health data. Through a nationwide network of over 11,000 FDA-cleared self-screening stations found at pharmacy retailers and other community locations and over 80 different third-party integrations, higi makes it easier to engage consumers in their health. As the largest repository of standardized biometric data, higi’s population health solutions enable healthcare organizations to better reach targeted populations; collect biometric and other health determinant data to stratify and prioritize consumers; and motivate consumers to take specific actions at a point of care. To date, more than 45 million people have used a higi health station to conduct over 259 million biometric screenings.


