Fujifilm Showcases Enterprise Imaging Portfolio And AI Initiative At HIMSS 2018

02 Mar 2018

FUJIFILM Medical Systems U.S.A., Inc., will showcase Enterprise Imaging and Informatics solutions at the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society’s (HIMSS) Annual Conference and Exhibition, held March 5-9, 2018 in Las Vegas, NV. In addition to its extensive product portfolio, Fujifilm will continue to expand its Artificial Intelligence (AI) Research Project into the U.S. market. Fujifilm’s AI development initiative will harness the power of AI to enhance its Synapse® Enterprise Imaging and Medical Informatics portfolio. For the first time, Fujifilm will introduce its newest brand REiLI, which will represent Fujifilm’s global Medical Informatics and Imaging AI technology Initiative.
FUJIFILM Medical Systems U.S.A., Inc. will showcase its evolving portfolio of medical informatics and Enterprise Imaging innovations at the Radiological Society of North America.
Johann Fernando
“Fujifilm has equipped healthcare professionals with tools to enhance patient imaging and the delivery of care for over 80 years. Our technology has evolved with the changing demands of the healthcare industry, bringing us to our next milestone, our Artificial Intelligence Research Project,” said Johann Fernando, Ph.D., Chief Operating Officer of FUJIFILM Medical Systems U.S.A., Inc. “We’ve been working collaboratively with some of our partners to develop and expand our artificial intelligence capabilities with the goal of aiding physicians in an even more impactful way in the coming years.”
Fujifilm’s Artificial Intelligence Research Project is based in Raleigh, North Carolina – the global development headquarters for Fujifilm’s Synapse Enterprise Imaging portfolio – in collaboration with FUJIFILM Corporation’s development team in Tokyo that will provide a wide range of image recognition technologies. Fujifilm will partner with its strategic customers in the U.S. market to draw upon clinical insights and expertise to bridge AI applications to imaging informatics solutions. In an increasingly complex healthcare environment with massive datasets and rising demand for high quality care, AI technology will have the potential to change the practice of medicine.
“We’ve received very positive feedback from healthcare professionals that have already seen live demonstrations of our Artificial Intelligence Research Project, and specifically the speed and depth of integrated workflow achieved with our new Synapse 5 server-side PACS system*,” said Bill Lacy, Vice President of Medical Informatics at FUJIFILM Medical Systems U.S.A., Inc. “As we focus initially on radiology, and with a clear focus on supporting and collaborating with radiologists, not replacing them, artificial intelligence technology can help radiologists aggregate PHI faster for more informed decisions, and prioritize their work and time more effectively.
* These integrations with Synapse 5 will be made commercially available in the US upon receipt of FDA Clearance.
More information on Fujifilm’s AI Research Project will be demonstrated at booth #6637 alongside the following products:
Synapse VNA— At the core of Fujifilm’s comprehensive Enterprise Imaging portfolio, the TeraMedica division of Fujifilm’s patented Synapse VNA leads the vendor-neutral archive market by integrating more specialties, more devices, and more data than any other VNA. Healthcare organizations can achieve cost savings, improve clinical outcomes, optimize workflow efficiencies, securely manage all departmental data and experience true imaging interoperability through the combination of Synapse VNA, Synapse Mobility Enterprise Viewer and Virtual Image Exchange.
Synapse 5 PACS— Designed with speed and functionality in mind, Synapse 5 PACS is a next-generation, secure server-side technology that enables instant access of massive datasets, working within the most popular browsers while using less bandwidth throughout the enterprise. Synapse 5 PACS powered with Synapse Communications features an enhanced suite of integrated tools including an integrated point-of-care solution, emergency department findings, results escalation and tracking, radiologist peer review, helping create a tailored workflow and a closed loop of communication between the radiology and all clinical departments.
Synapse RIS— One of the most comprehensive products of its kind on the market, Synapse RIS helps radiology facilities take command of their operations. Synapse RIS is a full-featured workflow management system that is fully integrated with Synapse 5 PACS. It features an advanced scheduling intelligence engine, a patient portal, business intelligence analytics and productivity-boosting tools that include universal worklist and paperless consent forms. With its flexible architecture and modern interoperability standards, Synapse RIS allows practices to easily integrate with physicians in their community.
Synapse Cardiovascular— Developed with ongoing direction from cardiologists, Synapse Cardiovascular offers capabilities and tools that help streamline, image review, and reporting across cardiac catheterization, ECG management, echocardiography, nuclear cardiology, 3D imaging and vascular ultrasound workflows.
Synapse 3D— Designed for use across multiple specialties including radiology, cardiology, surgery and more, Synapse 3D is an enterprise-wide solution for quickly performing advanced visualization workflows and accessing 3D rendered images. Full integration with Synapse 5 PACS and Synapse Cardiovascular means one-click access from any Synapse client.
Synapse Cloud Services— A scalable environment shaped to host and manage the Synapse Enterprise Imaging portfolio. Critical-access hospitals, imaging centers, and teleradiology providers can take advantage of Fujifilm’s cloud-based infrastructure and interoperability of software to maximize efficiency and cost savings.


