Clarify Health Appoints Doug Yokoyama CIO And CISO

28 Mar 2018

Continuing to expand its team, Silicon Valley based care optimization company attracts data security expert from financial services and six additional highly sought-after team members
Clarify Health Solutions, Inc., a pioneer in machine learning-enabled care optimization, announced today that veteran information technology and global data security expert, Doug Yokoyama has joined the company as their first chief information officer and chief information security officer. In his new role, Yokoyama will lead the company’s data operations, leveraging best-in-class protocols and advanced technologies from a variety of industries to bring the highest levels of fidelity and security to healthcare analytics, risk stratification and care guidance.
“Doug has deep knowledge and experience spearheading data governance process and harnessing both people and technology to advance organizational security measures. We welcome his expertise and contributions as we continue to empower healthcare organizations to succeed in a value-based world, both lowering costs and improving patient outcomes.”
With nearly 30 years of experience, Yokoyama has a proven track record for building scalable technology solutions that deliver operational effectiveness and impact for customers. Prior to joining Clarify Health, he was the senior vice president and CIO of Advent Software, a leader in automated portfolio accounting for investment management firms. As the CIO, he led the product development, IT, and data services teams. During his tenure at Advent, Yokoyama designed and built the most widely used buy-side trade order management platform as well as an international outsourcing system, developing all the necessary security controls and processes. Advent grew to service customers in 60 countries and over $18 trillion in assets before being acquired for $2.7B in 2015.
Jean Drouin
“Clarify improves patient care through the delivery of predictive analytics made possible by insights generated from a growing database of over 100 million individuals. With Doug on board, we have a leader with the experience and expertise to deliver the financial services and military-grade security that all healthcare companies should deploy,” said Jean Drouin, MD, CEO and co-founder of Clarify Health. “Doug has deep knowledge and experience spearheading data governance process and harnessing both people and technology to advance organizational security measures. We welcome his expertise and contributions as we continue to empower healthcare organizations to succeed in a value-based world, both lowering costs and improving patient outcomes.”
Doug Yokoyama
“I’m inspired and impressed by the work the Clarify development and security teams have done to create a safe and scalable framework for processing and storing sensitive data,” said Doug Yokoyama. “My goal is to continue building on this foundation to enable the company to serve our customers in new ways, including providing patients with more seamless and secure access to their own data.”
In addition to Yokoyama, Clarify Health is excited to announce the hiring of several new team members to service customers and accelerate product growth. Adam Travis, MD, a principal in the healthcare practice at The Boston Consulting Group (BCG) joins as clinical transformation director. Hannah Bayer, most recently a senior manager at Triage, joins as clinical transformation manager. Kendall Reischl, who was the senior marketing manager at Advent Software, arrives to lead marketing as the director of marketing and communications. Neechi Mosha, MD, a team leader in the healthcare practice at BCG, joins as associate director of business development. Stephanie Wels, who spent 4 years designing bundles as a senior fellow at McKinsey, comes aboard as a product manager. Industry veteran, Michelle Day, joins as director of quality assurance.


