Local Media Consortium Partners With Integral Ad Science To Deliver Better Results To Members For Brand Safety, Ad Fraud, And Viewability

02 Feb 2018

The Local Media Consortium (LMC), a strategic alliance of leading local media companies, today announced a new partnership with Integral Ad Science (IAS), a global measurement and analytics company that builds verification, optimization, and analytics solutions to empower the advertising industry to invest with confidence and activate consumers everywhere.
By partnering with IAS, the LMC will enable its members – which include more than 75 local media companies representing more than 1,700 newspaper, broadcast, and digital titles – to ensure and deliver better results to their advertisers and address marketers needs for brand safety, ad fraud, and viewability for digital display and video ad inventory across desktop and mobile web. Using IAS’s automated real-time platform, LMC members can seamlessly eliminate impression waste, streamline workflow, improve inventory quality, and increase revenue.
Rusty Coats
“Thanks to IAS, our members – who offer more than 12 billion ad impressions each month to agencies and brands seeking to reach quality local audiences in brand-safe environments – will have even greater control over direct and programmatic deals,” said Rusty Coats, CEO of the Local Media Consortium. “As media companies are increasingly challenged by ad fraud and ad blocking, IAS will provide greater means to verify and optimize inventory, helping participating members to validate and protect their ad traffic.”
Dave Marquard
IAS scores ad inventory for the URL down to the impression level on the key metrics media companies care most about: viewability, ad fraud, geo-compliance, and brand safety. It provides a single source of reporting that unifies publisher and customer data, eliminating discrepancies that come from multiple data sets. IAS’s optimization tool is powered by both machine learning and a dedicated FraudLab that makes sure ads are served to real people and reach the right audiences – all to maximize ROI for buyers and sellers.
“Our commitment to helping local media companies thrive through better ad inventory makes us an ideal partner for the LMC,” said Dave Marquard, VP of publisher product for IAS. “By automating custom ad delivery down to the placement level, the LMC’s members will have a greater opportunity to monetize more of their impressions and deliver on custom advertiser standards for brand safety, viewability, and fraud-free environments.”


