SEMrush Raises $40 Million To Further Refine Search Analytics Using AI/ML

03 May 2018

SEMrush Is Dedicated to Continue Helping Marketers All over the World Build and Execute Winning Marketing Strategies Using Machine Learning Algorithms for Search Analytics
SEMrush, the leading competitive intelligence and end-to-end analytics platform for digital marketing professionals, announced today that it has raised a total of $40 million in funding led by Greycroft, Siguler Guff, and e.ventures. SEMrush is the industry standard to improve insights, analytics, and measurement for digital marketers. It is used by leading brands, such as Booking.com, eBay, HP, and BNP Paribas.
Oleg Shchegolev
At the time of this announcement, Oleg Shchegolev, CEO and co-founder of SEMrush, said, “In today’s increasingly connected world, many companies win or lose based on their marketing strategy, specifically their digital strategy. In 2017, digital ad spend finally surpassed TV. While competition in digital marketing intensifies, SEMrush is dedicated to continue helping marketers all over the world build and execute winning marketing strategies.”
Dylan Pearce, Partner at Greycroft, said, “SEMrush has emerged as the global leader in digital marketing software and a must-have solution for virtually all competitive companies. With its world-class technical talent, we believe SEMrush can become the next great technology platform.”
SEMrush to Expand Its Machine Learning Powered Market Intelligence Capabilities and Proprietary Database
The funding will allow SEMrush to expand its Machine Learning powered market intelligence capabilities and proprietary database. The database supports more than 125 countries through many signals and data sources. These comprehensive data sets include search engine marketing (SEM) data such as one of the world’s largest backlink indexes, user behavior data, social media performance metrics, and brand mentions.
SEMrush’s software combines and analyses these signals to provide users with actionable insights. This enables clients to answer complex questions such as, “How can my page load or bounce rate impact my ranking in search engines?”, “What backlinks might be bad for my website?”, or “What title or topic should I choose to make my article perform?”
SEMrush Will Also Expand to Additional Platforms Such as Amazon and Baidu
Roman Simonov, Managing Director of Siguler Guff, said, “As the firm grows at high-pace, this funding round will take the company to the next level in terms of products offered and verticals covered.”
Roman added, “Siguler Guff is proud to be the first institutional backer of the company and recognizes the tremendous commercial value that SEMrush brings to its clients, small and large, in over 150 countries.”
SEMrush will also expand to additional platforms such as Amazon and Baidu, as new and existing platforms become vital to any digital marketing strategy. Furthermore, the funding will drive strategic acquisitions, enable SEMrush to scale the executive team, and support its best-of-breed technical expertise.
Nick Wilsdon, Product Owner, Search, Vodafone Group, said, “The most important thing I can have really is data. Data is my currency. I need to support initiatives, business cases – any tools that give me the insight I find incredibly useful. Then when it comes to measuring these initiatives, the reporting comes in handy. SEMrush is a very solid package that delivers exactly that.”
SEMrush was recently recognized as the Best SEO Software Suite in the US, UK and won the European Search Awards 2017.


