Health Systems Use ArmadaHealth’s SpecialtyCare Connect Platform To Optimize In-Network Patient Experience

05 Mar 2018

The SpecialtyCare Connect (SCC) Platform Is An Intelligence-Driven Referral Engine For Health Systems Designed To Optimize In-Network Steerage And Provide Visibility Into The Gaps Of Quality Specialty Care
ArmadaHealth, a subsidiary of ArmadaGlobal, is introducing SpecialtyCare Connect® for Health Systems at HIMSS 2018 Las Vegas, Kiosk 14020 in Hall G’s Population Health Innovation Center, where Health System representatives can sign up for a complimentary trial for their family.
Too many patients continue to be referred to the wrong specialists
The SpecialtyCare Connect (SCC) platform is an intelligence-driven referral engine for health systems designed to optimize in-network steerage and provide visibility into the gaps of quality specialty care. By leveraging machine learning and AI-driven data science coupled with experienced patient navigation professionals, the SCC platform enables health systems to reduce both the friction of patient referrals and the number of inappropriate referrals. SCC provides insight into specialists who are best matched to a given patient’s clinical and non-clinical needs.
Primary Care Providers can access the platform directly to launch a patient-specialist match. Health systems can further benefit from the high touch patient support utilizing ArmadaHealth’s clinical care consultants. SCC can be leveraged to internally monitor and manage specialist reputations, quality measures, physician experience and patient reported outcomes.
Steve Schaefer
Steve Schaefer, CEO of ArmadaHealth commented, “We have assembled a diverse team of physicians, entrepreneurs, technologists and healthcare insiders, that bring practical sensibility to the health system industry, along with over a decade of evidence-based results in guiding patients toward optimal physicians for their condition.”
“Furthermore, we have built a world-class clinical leadership team, who have worked tirelessly with our data science team to provide key clinical insights for our physician evaluation and matching algorithms. This has propelled us to play an integral role in helping health systems solve their access problems and meet the new demands and opportunities of value-based care,” continued Mr. Schaefer.
Suzanne Clough
“Getting to the right specialist at the beginning of the patient journey is crucial in achieving the Quadruple Aim,” commented Suzanne Clough, M.D., Chief Innovation Officer of ArmadaHealth. “By collecting and considering clinical and non-clinical determinants of the patient and the specialist, we further enhance the precision of the patient-physician match based not only on the clinical condition of the patient, but also their non-clinical expectations of the physician and the practice.”
SCC can be implemented initially as an add-on service to a Health System’s existing call center, providing immediate value. With a broader implementation, Quality organizations can use SCC to manage their Physician Profile Reputations and the patient experience, directly improving the quality measurements of the hospital system.
“Ultimately, our goal is to optimize the patient-specialist relationship in every way that makes sense to realistically achieve the Quadruple Aim,” said Dr. Clough.
Join a lively discussion at HIMSS with Dr. Clough and Shahid Shah, ArmadaHealth’s Chief Technology Officer on the topic of Driving the Quadruple Aim by Getting Real About Quality at 11am on Thursday, March 8th in Hall G Cassanova Fireside Chat.
 


