VentureBeat Selects Amplero As Top 5 Most Promising AI Technology

25 Oct 2017

 Amplero, a recognized leader in core artificial intelligence marketing (AIM) technology, is scheduled to present at the VentureBeat Summit 2017 AI Innovation Showcase on Tuesday, Oct. 24. Amplero was selected to participate by an expert panel as one of the Top 5 Most Promising AI Technologies based on disruptive and differentiated technology with a business application.
The theme of this year’s VB Summit is “Riding the AI Wave,” focused on applied AI that skips the hype and is already generating breakthrough results. According to a recent study conducted by Forrester, 86 percent of marketers believe that AI can provide value to their business and 78 percent are planning to expand or implement artificial intelligence marketing to support digital transformation initiatives. Amplero Head of Product Garrett Tenold will speak to real-world examples of how AI is transforming the way consumer-obsessed businesses like Sprint, Xbox, and DoubleDown interact with their customers at scale.
Details of Amplero’s participation at the VB Summit 2017 AI Innovation Showcase, include:
What: Amplero Presenting as a “Top 5 Most Promising AI Technology” at the VentureBeat AI Innovation Showcase
When:Tuesday, Oct. 24, 2017 at 1:55 p.m., PDT
Who:Garrett Tenold, Head of Product, Amplero
Where: VB Summit 2017, Claremont Club & Spa, 41 Tunnel Rd., Berkeley, Calif. 94705
Headquartered in Seattle, Amplero is an Artificial Intelligence Marketing (AIM) company that enables business-to-consumer (B2C) marketers at global brands to optimize customer lifetime value at a scale that is not humanly possible.
Unlike traditional rules-based marketing automation systems, Amplero’s Artificial Intelligence Marketing Platform leverages machine learning and multi-armed bandit experimentation to dynamically test thousands of permutations to adaptively optimize every customer interaction and maximize customer lifetime value and loyalty.
With Amplero, marketers in competitive, customer-obsessed industries like telecom, banking, gaming, and consumer tech are currently seeing measurable lift across key performance indicators—including 1-3% incremental growth in customer topline revenue and 3-5x lift in retention rates.


