Detroit Startup Launches Algo 2.0 Making Their AI Enabled Analyst Workbot Even Smarter

12 Jan 2018

Business Intelligence and Enterprise AI come together with a Smart Assistant
Algomus, Inc. headquartered in Troy, MI launches their 2nd generation Enterprise Analytics Workbot Algo 2.0 at CES 2018. Through the increased application of Machine Learning, including Deep Learning and Robotic Process Automation (RPA) Algo is taking on a more important role in the daily operations of his enterprise customers. The new UI is streamlined, conversational, and context-aware. Algo 2.0 has been optimized to produce answers to complex questions and analytical calculations with flexibility and speed. Improvements in the Natural Language Processing engine and a new Predictive Text feature make the user experience smooth and intuitive.
Key New Features
Context-Aware Conversational Interface
Chat and Search Based Interaction with Data
Multiple Measure Q&A Capability
Data Science and Analytical Workflow Automation
Custom Calculators, Recommenders and Simulators
Enhanced Forecasting Capabilities
A/B Test Tracking
Data Storyboarding via PowerPoint
Collaboration Features: Shared Contexts and Favorites
Workflow Integration via API
Algo co-creator and Algomus CEO Amjad Hussain says “Algo 2.0 is transforming from an Askbot to a Workbot, and transforming organizations from being reactive to proactive with their data. It is a big step forward for us and our customers. Algo is aimed at growing the collaborative intelligence profile of our customers, with people and AI agents working hand in hand to deliver exponential business outcomes.”
Get answers to your questions in seconds. Simply type in your question and Algo will return an answer as well as a relevant data visualization, dashboard, or table. All answers and data are easily saved, exported, or shared as a storyboard or email.
With built-in Statistical Machine Learning functions and Calculators, Algo can empower any level business user to become more analytical and data-informed in their decision making. All of the underlying data in Algo is clean and up to date so all you have to do is ask! Algo has a Natural Language Processing engine and Predictive Text feature making the user experience smooth and intuitive. By providing more than just answers Algo can go as far as completing tasks using RPA.


