Conversica To Showcase How Conversational AI Is Automating Lead Follow-Up At The Marketo Summit Next Week

01 May 2018

Marketo Marketing Automation Users to See How to Effectively Convert More Leads Into Sales Opportunities Through the Use of AI-Powered Assistants
Conversica, the leader in conversational AI for business, announced that it will showcase the latest conversational AI solutions for marketing and sales at the Marketo Marketing Nation Summit taking place April 29-May 2 in San Francisco.
The Marketing Nation Summit is the premier industry event that brings together the community of Marketo® customers, LaunchPoint technology partners, and marketing thought leaders for three days of compelling presentations, best practice sessions, and hands-on experiences from marketing practitioners, experienced experts, and technology and consulting partners from around the world.
Conversica’s AI Sales Assistants are used by thousands of marketers to maximize ROI by increasing marketing qualified leads, converting more of those MQLs into sales opportunities, and making sure that not a single potential customer falls through the cracks. Conversica integrates easily with Marketo and, unlike sequenced email templates or chatbots, creates genuine human conversations that result in more opportunities and sales pipeline.
Conversica at the Conference
As a Marketo LaunchPoint partner, Conversica will be demonstrating how AI works in conjunction with Marketo to engage, qualify and follow up with leads in real time. By visiting Conversica at booth 538 in the Expo Hall, attendees will learn how to:
Effectively move more leads down the funnel, because everyone gets contacted
Boost the effectiveness of their sales teams by freeing them from the task of lead follow-up
Drive engaging conversations with every lead using human-like email and SMS conversations
Gain visibility into the lead follow-up process to ensure that every potential customer is engaged
Those attending the Summit are encouraged to attend the session by innovative Conversica customer Microsoft on Monday at 11:30 am. Charles Eichenbaum, Director of Marketing Technology & Applied Artificial Intelligence at Microsoft, will present on “How Microsoft Is Using Artificial Intelligence in Marketing: Today and Tomorrow.”
His presentation will explain how Microsoft sees AI, showcase how the company is using AI in marketing today, and share some of the company’s learnings on implementing artificial intelligence-powered solutions.
Carl Landers
“We are excited to join thousands of Marketo users next week to learn the latest in marketing best practices and to share how Conversica customers have boosted their return on marketing spend by applying conversational AI to their lead follow-up processes,” said Carl Landers, CMO at Conversica. “We are especially proud to have our successful customer Microsoft showcasing their AI expertise and sharing insights on the practical application of artificial intelligence in the marketing technology stack.”
The Marketo Marketing Nation Summit is being held at Moscone Center West in San Francisco.


