Telit And IBM Accelerate Global Industrial IoT Deployments

13 Jul 2018

Telit’s deviceWISE IoT platform is now interoperable with the IBM Watson IoT platform – New reseller agreement enables manufacturers and other industrial businesses to leverage the combined power of the world’s best-in-class solutions for IoT and AI
Telit, a global enabler of Internet of Things (IoT) solutions, today announced that its deviceWISE IoT platform is now fully interoperable with the IBM IoT platform. Working together, the two companies will help manufacturers and other businesses to minimize the cost, risk, complexity and lead time of deploying solutions for monitoring and control, industrial automation, asset tracking and field service operations. This is the latest example of Telit’s global leadership in rapidly onboarding and integrating industrial devices and assets into the IoT, highlighting Telit’s extensive device side experience and industrial technology and services expertise.
Read More: UK and France to strengthen ties in Artificial Intelligence and data
The combination of IBM’s Watson IoT platform and Telit’s deviceWISE IoT solution gives manufacturers and other industrial businesses powerful new options for near-instant onboarding of industrial products, systems and assets, and applying advanced analytics, artificial intelligence and application development. deviceWISE streamlines the process of integrating industrial IoT (IIoT) devices and applications by providing a large library of native device drivers and industrial protocols. This eliminates the need for custom coding and other expensive, time-consuming integration tasks, so businesses can add value to their IIoT bottom line and realize competitive benefits even faster. The IBM Watson IoT platform, available on the IBM Cloud, brings real-time insights to IoT data and powerful Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based capabilities including Cognitive Analysis, Machine Learning, and Natural Language Processing.
Read More: Millennial Parents Feel More Secured about AI Babysitting their Generation Alpha Kids!
Stephan Biller
“This new agreement enables manufacturers and other industrial businesses to leverage the combined strength of the world’s two best solutions for IIoT and AI,” said Yosi Fait, Telit CEO. “By working together, Telit and IBM are ensuring that IIoT lives up to its full potential for maximizing efficiency, productivity and more.”
“AI makes it easier and faster for manufacturers to aggregate, analyze and act on data from multiple sources,” said Stephan Biller, Vice President for Offering Management, IBM Watson IoT. “Telit’s deviceWISE complements IBM Watson’s AI capabilities, making the two solutions a natural fit that benefit manufacturers and other industrial businesses worldwide.”
Read More: Interview with Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder and CEO, Bespoke Inc


