Pega Receives Industry Awards For Its Artificial Intelligence-Powered Customer Engagement Capabilities

13 Mar 2018

Pega solutions recognized by TMC CUSTOMER Product of the Year and Stevie Sales & Customer Service Award Programs
Pegasystems Inc., the software company empowering customer engagement at the world’s leading enterprises, today announced the TMC CUSTOMER Product of the Year Awards and the Stevie Awards for Sales & Customer Service honored Pega for its artificial intelligence (AI)-powered customer engagement abilities.
The TMC CUSTOMER Product of the Year award recognized Pega® Intelligent Virtual Assistant, an AI capability that turns applications into smart assistants on any channel – from SMS and email, to Facebook, Alexa, and more. Part of Pega® Platform, Pega’s model-driven application development environment, it evolves bots into digital agents that anticipate customer needs, make helpful suggestions, complete complex tasks, and provide exceptional customer experiences.
This is the fourth consecutive year Pega has been honored with a TMC CUSTOMER Product of the Year award. Presented by TMC, a global, integrated media company, the 2018 CUSTOMER Product of the Year Awards recognize vendors advancing the call center, CRM, and teleservices industries. The award highlights products enabling companies to meet and exceed customer expectations.
Pega® Customer Decision Hub‘s T-Switch capability received a bronze award from the Stevie Awards for Sales & Customer Service for its ability to mitigate risk and maintain regulatory compliance while providing differentiated customer experiences. It allows organizations to set thresholds for AI transparency or opaqueness so business users can build AI systems that meet their organization’s transparency requirements. The T-Switch is a feature of Pega Customer Decision Hub, which combines adaptive analytics and real-time decisioning to deliver relevancy and personalization to customers at every interaction.
The Stevie Awards for Sales & Customer Service are part of the Stevie Awards organization, which hosts a number of premier business award competitions. The Stevie Awards for Sales & Customer Service honor customer service, contact center, business development, and sales professionals, and received more than 2500 global submissions this year.
Rich Tehrani
Quotes & Commentary
“The 2018 CUSTOMER Product of the Year Awards honors companies that have proven their commitment to innovating and improving customer experience,” said Rich Tehrani, CEO, TMC. “Pega Intelligent Virtual Assistant was awarded for creating intelligent assistants on any channel that enable organizations to bring better experiences to their customers.”
Michael Gallagher
“The Stevie Awards for Sales and Customer Service offer the industry’s top honors for outstanding performances in the workplace worldwide,” said Michael Gallagher, president, Stevie Awards. “Pega Customer Decision Hub’s T-Switch capability provides an innovative way for businesses to address concerns surrounding AI usage and guarantee transparency for better experiences and more customer confidence.”
Don Schuerman
“While organizations rush to deploy AI to better engage with customers, many don’t have the right tools in place to take full advantage of the real power AI can offer,” said Don Schuerman, chief technology officer, Pegasystems. “We’ve responded to this need by infusing accessible and practical AI into our offerings, including Pega Intelligent Virtual Assistant and Pega Customer Decision Hub’s T-Switch capabilities. Receiving these industry accolades further reinforces Pega’s continued commitment to ensuring our clients have the best technology to create optimal customer experiences.”


