Tymlez Announces Appointment Of Peter Loop Principal Blockchain Architect

06 Feb 2018

Well Known Blockchain Technology Expert Joins Tymlez Team Bringing Blockchain to the Enterprise
Tymlez, Inc., a subsidiary of blockchain technology firm Tymlez Group Ltd A.C.N. 622.817.421 (Tymlez), is pleased to announce the appointment of Peter Loop as Principal Blockchain Architect ().
The mission of Tymlez is to bring commercial-grade Blockchain technology to the enterprise. The Tymlez Blockchain Solution Platform (TBSP) allows enterprises to utilize new Blockchain technologies to develop and implement scalable, enterprise ready applications that will not only support new, digital business models but also leverages existing IT-landscapes.
Peter (@Loop_Architect) joins Tymlez, as principle Blockchain architect, in the Seattle office. In previous roles he was AVP/Sr. Principal Technology Architect with Infosys, where he was an evangelist for Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLT). At Microsoft and Intel, Peter architected enterprise systems, driving innovation in cloud strategies. Peter has an MBA in Decision Science and is a graduate of Blockchain University.
Peter Loop
“I am excited to be at the leading edge of enterprise blockchain adoption,” Peter said. “I believe Blockchains will fundamentally change and/or disrupt how businesses and governments operate, specifically with automation, digitization of processes, tokenization of assets and activities, and codification of complex contracts.”
“Tymlez’s TBSP is a robust platform that enables developers and business owners to get started today. I’m excited to join this world class team pursing the vision to be the gold standard provider of enterprise blockchain technology.”
John Haggard, EVP Americas commented, “Peter is an exciting addition to Tymlez. He is a highly respected thought leader in the Blockchain community as attested to his articles which can be found on Coindesk. He is an expert in guiding enterprises through the fog of emerging paradigms which is exactly what Blockchain technology is, we are thrilled to have him join the Tymlez team.”


