The Works Implements RichRelevance AI-Powered Personalised Online Search, Sees 37% Increase In E-Commerce Sales During Christmas Trading

13 Feb 2018

Leading UK Discount Retailer Selects RichRelevance’s Findtm to Deliver Personalized Online Search that Harnesses the Power of AI
RichRelevance, the global leader in experience personalisation, today announced that The Works, the UK’s leading discount retailer, has become one of the first retailers in the country to implement a personalised search functionality on its website, powered by RichRelevance Find™, the Artificial Intelligence (AI) search solution.
Previously, The Works team lacked visibility into their site search performance due to employing a black-box solution. The Works turned to the RichRelevance Find’s dynamic and data-driven search solution in November 2017 delivering an immediate impact on their bottom line.
After benchmarking against multiple competitors and ultimately selecting RichRelevance, The Works implemented FindTM in just 12 weeks. This allowed The Works to leverage FindTM on theworks.co.uk in time for Peak Trading Season 2017. During this period, 36% of The Works online sales can be directly attributed to the personalised site search solution. At the same time, The Works achieved its strongest ever Christmas trading performance, with e-commerce sales up 37% like-for-like in the 12 weeks to 24th December, accounting for 10% of the total turnover for the quarter.
Alex Beard, Online Trading Manager at The Works said “Previously, we’d employed an out of the box solution. It was restrictive in its functionality and performed very poorly at a subjective level. I say subjective, as we had no data to help us understand how it was performing at an objective level. After meeting with RichRelevance, it was apparent that they’d created a solution that really focused on providing results for the customer. Beyond that, they’d also taken our needs, as a retailer, into account by providing a clear return on investment (ROI).”
Henrik Nambord
Henrik Nambord, VP & Head of EMEA at RichRelevance, said “The Works represents a forward-looking e-commerce business that has invested in technology to ensure customers get the best possible experience when exploring its website. Getting customers to the product they want as quickly as possible is the key to a good ecommerce experience – and, ultimately, a purchase. For the first time ever, site search is personal, real-time and friendly.”
FindTM is the first personalised search tool that can be used by retailers to offer highly relevant on-site search results as part of their ecommerce experience. It uses real-time shopping behaviour, reading signals instantly to ensure that customers receive truly relevant product search results. Unlike previous generations of search engines that match results based solely on search terms and manual product tags, FindTM predicts the shoppers’ interests and intent to buy allowing brands and retailers like The Works to deliver search results in an engaging and visual way that appeals to today’s shopper.


