Synthio Welcomes SaaS Leader Sean O’Leary As Chief Executive Officer

27 Apr 2018

Atlanta-based B2B Contact Data Platform brings on IT veteran Sean O’Leary as Chief Executive Officer
Synthio, an automated B2B contact data platform with contact data cleansing, enrichment and origination capability, today announced the appointment of technology leader Sean O’Leary as Chief Executive Officer.
Sean O’Leary
“I am incredibly excited about the opportunity to join the Synthio team at this stage in their journey,” said O’Leary. “Aaron Biddar has been an excellent visionary leader for the company from inception. I look forward to working closely with him and the rest of the amazing team at Synthio as we continue to build a world-class DaaS company.”
With over 25 years of experience in the Information Technology industry, O’Leary’s strategic prowess is evidenced by his successful leadership track record at a myriad of B2B organizations from venture-backed startups to Fortune 500 companies.
Most recently, O’Leary served as President & CEO of KnowledgeTree Inc., a leading company in the Sales Enablement space providing innovative content management software to global enterprises via their industry-leading SaaS platform. KnowledgeTree was acquired by Savo Group in 2017.
Aaron Biddar
Prior to KnowledgeTree, Mr. O’Leary served as President & CEO, of StrikeIron, another industry leader in the Data-as-a-Service (DaaS) space, which was acquired by Informatica in 2014. O’Leary has also held senior executive level positions at Motorola, Good Technology, and Cisco Systems.
“We have been searching for a partner to help me lead Synthio as we enter our next stage of growth,” said Aaron Biddar, Founder and Chief Strategy Officer (formerly CEO) of Synthio. “After a thorough and exhaustive search, we are confident that Sean inherently complements both myself and our corporate strategy. He is the perfect fit to help lead Synthio as we become the dominant player in the contact data management space.”


