Atos And GENCI Launch The Atos Joseph Fourier Award 2018 To Accelerate Research And Innovation

24 Mar 2018

The Atos Joseph Fourier Award 2018 Rewards A Person Or A Team For The Excellence Of Work Carried Out Within A French Laboratory, Public Or Private
Atos, a global leader in digital transformation, today launches the Atos Joseph Fourier Award 2018 in partnership with GENCI (French National Equipment for Intensive Computing). This award follows the 250th anniversary of the birth of famous French mathematician and physicist Joseph Fourier, whose work has largely contributed to the mathematical modeling of physical phenomena, which is at the heart of digital technologies today.
The Atos Joseph Fourier Award 2018 rewards a person or a team for the excellence of work carried out within a French laboratory, public or private, and aims to accelerate research and innovation in three key areas for society: 
Numerical simulation
Digital simulation has become an essential tool for research, innovation and business competitiveness and is used in almost every scientific and industrial field, including the research of new medicinal drugs, the study of weather evolution, the modeling of earthquakes and the development of new materials for the automobile and aeronautic industries.
Artificial intelligence
By understanding, predicting and prescribing behaviors, artificial intelligence provides various solutions across a wide range of areas such as medical diagnosis, including treatment of diseases that are currently incurable, financial markets and cybersecurity.
Quantum computing
Exploiting the properties of quantum particles is at the root of the main innovations of the 20th century (laser, transistor and GPS for example); quantum computing should theoretically be able to solve ultra-complex problems in an unprecedented time and accelerate Machine Learning and prescriptive studies.
The Atos Joseph Fourier Award 2018 will award each winning entry with a prize of 10,000 euros and will give participants up to 200,000 hours of machine time on GENCI supercomputers.
The applications will be evaluated by a jury made up of individuals, representing the French scientific and industrial sectors, who will nominate the winners of the Atos Joseph Fourier Award 2018. Applications must be submitted by June 8, 2018. The awards ceremony will be held in July 2018.
The previous edition of the Atos Joseph Fourier Award awarded two teams of researchers based in France working respectively on ultra-rapid diagnosis for heart disease and stroke, and the development of the “Material by design” approach, which aims to revolutionize the development of new materials.
Other European editions of the Atos Joseph Fourier Award will take place after the completion of the French and Czech ceremonies.
Atos is a global leader in digital transformation with approximately 100,000 employees in 73 countries and annual revenue of around €13 billion. The European number one in Big Data, Cybersecurity, High Performance Computing and Digital Workplace, The Group provides Cloud services, Infrastructure & Data Management, Business & Platform solutions, as well as transactional services through Worldline, the European leader in the payment industry. With its cutting-edge technologies, digital expertise and industry knowledge, Atos supports the digital transformation of its clients across various business sectors: Defense, Financial Services, Health, Manufacturing, Media, Energy & Utilities, Public sector, Retail, Telecommunications and Transportation.


