Crypto & Blockchain Companies Join Forces To Create New Global Trade Group

13 Mar 2018

Digital Asset Trade Association (DATA) Names Steering Committee & Launches Search for Executive Director
Several leading companies in the crypto/blockchain ecosystem have come together to establish the Digital Asset Trade Association (DATA), a global, non-profit organization focused on lobbying behalf of the industry within all levels of governments, corporations, and communities. The news was officially announced at the San Francisco book launch of “The Truth Machine: The Blockchain and the Future of Everything,” written by Michael J. Casey, senior advisor at MIT Media Lab’s Digital Currency Initiative and chairman of CoinDesk’s advisory board, and Paul Vigna, a reporter at The Wall Street Journal.
Crypto & Blockchain Companies Join Forces To Create New Global Trade Group Dedicated To Promote Growth And Development Of Blockchain Technology
The impetus to form DATA is the need for a single trusted voice and continued crypto/blockchain industry support as more states, regions, and nations create legislation such as the five crypto legislative proposals out of Wyoming—including HB 70, a bill that classifies utility tokens as a separate asset class. All five proposals have passed the state legislature and are now headed to Wyoming Governor Mead for his signature in the coming days. DATA has incorporated in the forward-thinking state of Wyoming in part due to this landmark event in the crypto/blockchain space.
The steering committee of this new trade group includes:
Brent Cohen, Director of Marketing Communications, WAX/OPSkins
Alanna Gombert, Chief Revenue Officer, MetaX
Brittany Kaiser, Co-Founder, Bueno Capital and CryptoHQ
Alex Lightman, CEO, TokenCommunities Plc.
Jill Richmond, Senior Vice President, Sparkchain
Blain Rethmeier, Managing Director, Ditto PR
John Wise, Founder and CEO, Loci
The committee’s first order of business is to kick-off a search for candidates to lead the trade organization as executive director. In addition, they will begin lobbying efforts in the U.S. and Europe in partnership with other local blockchain groups.
Key industry leaders are already voicing support:
Marshall Hayner
“Blockchain technology has the ability to create greater efficiencies and build new marketplaces—and requires a trade group that can steer its evolution into broader use across the globe,” said Marshall Hayner, Founder and CEO, Metal Payments. “DATA will play a critical part in the next phase of crypto and blockchain growth, bringing disparate parties together in order to drive meaningful discussions with lawmakers, hammering out legislation that allows for the advancement of the technology in various sectors.”
Alex Lightman
“DATA brings together the right team of credible benevolent experts in the right place at the right time, as visionary political leaders in places as diverse as Wyoming, Gibraltar, and Japan, seek policy thought leadership,” said Alex Lightman, noted steering committee member, author, entrepreneur, futurist, and CEO of TokenCommunities, Plc. “The organization will address the needs of a booming complex market for digital assets that might become our next versions of money, commodities, and companies. DATA will be able to speak with one unified legitimate voice to, paradoxically, represent the vast diversity of the decentralization technology innovators.”
“Policy at the local and national level will have tremendous impact on the future of blockchain technology,” said Ron Resnick, Executive Director, Enterprise Ethereum Alliance. “DATA and its steering committee will get ahead of the issues to ensure that legislation aligns with the industries needs to promote growth for all.”


