Ontology Announces Release Of Open-Source Projects To Encourage Blockchain Technology Development

02 Apr 2018

Officially Announced The Release Of Its First Open Source Projects On GitHub, And With It The Beginning Of The Ontology Developer Community
Today, Ontology, a new generation public blockchain infrastructure project and a distributed trust collaboration platform, officially announced the release of its first open source projects on GitHub, and with it the beginning of the Ontology developer community. Developers across the world are invited to join the Ontology project and together invest in the development of public blockchain infrastructure.
Ontology provides new high-performance public blockchains that include a series of complete distributed ledger and smart contract systems. On the upper layer, Ontology will constantly provide common modules for different kinds of distributed applications, such as distributed digital identity framework, distributed data exchange protocols, and so on, which each support distributed trust collaboration. Based on specific scenario requirements, Ontology will continue to develop new common modules.
Considering the large scale of the public blockchain infrastructure, Ontology will be rapidly deployed through an open-minded, open-source model and accompanying technical community to rapidly deploy projects together. Portions can also be gradually deployed to different scenarios, with feedback being continuously applied to enhance functions required for practical applications. Therefore, Ontology will use a multi-version rapid iterative method to continuously promote the basic chain and related application service system. In the first stage, Ontology will open the first batch of projects for open source, including projects that have nearly completed their first edition and have entered their first testing phase, as well as some projects under development. Some of the projects in the planning and design stage will continue to be open source in the follow up.
Jun Li
Jun Li, Founder of Ontology, said: “After years of exploring, practicing, and thinking deeply on the fields of technology and applications, we acknowledge that blockchain brings about social collaboration in finance, business, organizations, and populations. It reduces costs, increases efficiency, and even changes values of existing models in business and social collaboration. We must also recognize that blockchain is still without perfection, as it faces many problems in technology, ecosystem, and other mechanisms that need to be explored to support mainstream industries. Therefore, at this stage, industry collaboration is far more important than competition. Ontology will continuously cooperate with industry peers and technology communities in the spirit of open source and open cooperation in order to advance the development of blockchain technology and the industry.”


