AI, Captain! Hitachi Partners With Stena Line To Implement Digital Technology In Shipping

08 Jun 2018

Hitachi helps ferry operator Stena Line to increase business performance whilst maintaining commitment to sustainable shipping operations
Hitachi Europe Ltd., a subsidiary of Hitachi, Ltd. (TSE:6501), has partnered with Stena Line, one of the largest shipping companies in Europe, to implement artificial intelligence technology on ships to reduce fuel consumption costs and become an important tool in the company’s efforts to minimise environmental impact.
The partnership will see a team of Hitachi experts from across its business units review the existing digital architecture, in close collaboration with Stena Line, and advise the ferry company as it aims to become the world’s leading cognitive shipping company by 2021.
Controlling fuel consumption is vital to Stena Line’s business, since it is a major part of their total cost base. By leveraging cutting-edge AI technologies, Hitachi will be able to identify the key factors causing high fuel consumption and, critically, advise how to make operations more efficient.
Hicham Abdessamad
Stena Line is at the forefront of the shipping industry’s efforts to reduce its environmental footprint whilst increasing efficiency through the integration of smart technology.
Rune Kleiberg
Hicham Abdessamad, Chief Executive Officer, Hitachi Global Digital Holdings Corporation, Corporate Officer of Hitachi, Ltd said: “Digitalisation plays a key role in helping industries such as shipping optimise their operations for both financial performance and environmental impact. We are engaged with Stena Line on a number of strategic co-creation initiatives and we see this as an important next step in providing digital expertise to help them achieve positive business and societal outcomes.”
Rune Kleiberg, Head of digital strategy, Stena Line said: “With a structured approach and by taking continuous initiatives, the aim is for Stena Line to become a leader in sustainable shipping. We are pleased to have Hitachi on board to help us in our cognitive journey to improve fleet operation across ship and shore, providing new capabilities for safer and more sustainable ferry journeys, as well as helping improve operational efficiencies and overall vessel performance.”


