Moeda, The First Cooperative Banking Platform, Presented At CryptoHQ, Davos-Klosters

25 Jan 2018

CEO Taynah Reis Spoke At Three Panels, All Of Which Were Centralized In The Social Aspect Of Blockchain
Taynah Reis, the Co-founder and CEO of Moeda, the first cooperative banking platform powered by blockchain technology, spoke at the first annual CryptoHQ summit in Davos-Klosters, Switzerland. The summit is the first of its kind for 2018, coming off of a year that saw increased interest in crypto, blockchain, and the possibilities associated with it. Global leaders and industry professionals in the blockchain community took part in the conference, including Dr. Steven Waterhouse and Rik Willard.
While much of the panels and presentations of the summit were focused on the financial and technological aspect of cryptocurrency and blockchain, Reis emphasized the social good inherent in them, saying that “[We should] not forget the people in the equation,” and that blockchain provides nothing short of a “revolution in trust.”
Taynah Reis
“[In Brazil] you can have many different identity registers and many different social security numbers. When my government handles food or a food cart for example, you have one person, one beneficiary, ending up with five different carts and people that are already dead receiving those carts and those benefits. That will not happen with the blockchain technology, because you cannot duplicate and you cannot erase. Once you have that self-sovereignty, once you have that identity and you have all trace impact to that single register, we can trust. So that’s a trust revolution that is built…”
Reis spoke at three panels, all of which were centralized in the social aspect of blockchain. The first, The Future of Impact (Governance and Finance) discussed the changes likely to come in impact investing for governments and financial centers across the world. The second, Women and Inclusion in Blockchain, centered around the assertion that not only does blockchain provide incredible opportunities for women and girls, but the very infrastructure behind it favors gender equality. And third, the Future of Financial Services and Financial Inclusion focused on how blockchain is able to bring scores of people into the financial market and receive support that they otherwise might not have been able to. Moeda’s participation in the event indicates the growing enthusiasm for blockchain technology and the possibilities it entails.
Founded in April 2017 by Taynah Reis, Brad Chun, and Isa Yu, Moeda is the first cooperative banking system powered by blockchain technology. Moeda harnesses the power, speed, and efficiency of blockchain technology to empower underfunded and unbanked entrepreneurs worldwide.


