EToro Adds Cardano To Expanding List Of Cryptocurrencies

18 Jun 2018

Launch of Cardano Brings Total Number Of Crypto Assets Available On The Platform To Eleven
eToro, a global trading and investment platform with over ten million users, has today added Cardano onto its platform, bringing the total number of cryptocurrency assets available on the site to eleven.
Cardano’s ADA token which is the world’s first peer-reviewed blockchain. It is a third-generation cryptocurrency and smart contract platform that claims to improve upon the scaling problems of Bitcoin, a first-generation coin, and Ethereum, which belongs to the second-generation.
The addition of Cardano comes as investors increasingly turn their attention to altcoins, as they seek new investment opportunities and diversification for their portfolios.
Read More: Founder Of Tetris Henk Rogers To Serve As An Advisor For BLMP Network
It will now be available on the eToro platform alongside Bitcoin, Ethereum, Bitcoin Cash, XRP, Litecoin, Ethereum Classic, Dash, Stellar, NEO and EOS.
Cryptocurrency investors on eToro own the real underlying asset, with eToro acting as custodian.
Cardano will also be added to eToro’s Crypto CopyFund, which enables investors to diversify across all available cryptocurrencies (weighted by market cap) with just one click.
eToro users benefit from eToro’s verification procedures, security processes and established reputation within the crypto community.
Read More: Cognizant’s Netcentric Named 2018 Adobe Experience Cloud Partner Of The Year In EMEA
Yoni Assia
Yoni Assia, Co-founder and CEO at eToro, recently commented: “We are seeing growing interest in new cryptocurrencies increasing all the time. We are committed to bringing the top traded crypto assets onto our platform for our users to invest in.”
In April, eToro added EOS to its platform. EOS is the token linked to one of the most powerful infrastructures for decentralized applications. EOS is a blockchain-based, decentralized system that enables the development, hosting, and execution of commercial-scale decentralized applications (dApps ) on its platform.


