NYC Startup Fusemachines Launches AI Fellowship Globally Using Columbia University’s Online Program

30 Dec 2017

Fusemachines is inviting applications for its annual Artificial Intelligence Fellowship, a one-year program aimed at expanding the talent pool of AI engineers and creating opportunities in the field of artificial intelligence and machine learning. At the end of the fellowship program, 25 fellows will receive a MicroMasters in Artificial Intelligence from Columbia University through the online teaching platform edX.
The Fusemachines AI Fellowship is designed to provide students with a Computer Science or Math background with in-depth training in artificial intelligence and machine learning. Its ultimate aim is to produce qualified AI experts to meet the rising demands of industries seeking to advance in machine learning, deep learning, and natural language processing.
Soulaymane Kachani
“Columbia prepares students to be innovators and leaders, so it’s fitting that we are offering cutting-edge content taught by outstanding research faculty, marrying advanced technology with sound pedagogy, and opening it up to learners around the world,” said Soulaymane Kachani, Vice Provost for Teaching and Learning of Columbia Universityand Senior Vice Dean for Columbia Engineering.
Most advanced technologies built using artificial intelligence are limited to big organizations in major cities. Fusemachines’ goal is to “Democratize AI” — empower local communities by giving them opportunities to build the next generation of AI products. This challenging task can only be achieved by making AI education accessible to people of every race, gender, and background.
After successfully launching a fellowship in Nepal, Fusemachines is now laying the groundwork for a program in the Dominican Republic, Rwanda, and New York City, which attract a vast pool of students with high aptitudes in scientific disciplines and an innovative mindset. As AI engineers are fast becoming the most sought-after hires across industries, Fusemachines recognizes the responsibility to teach young students the transformative potential of artificial intelligence. The one-year fellowship will provide selected scholars from underserved communities in New York City with mentorship and resources to develop advanced skills in artificial intelligence and machine learning.


