Nikao Yang Joins Lucidity As Chief Operating Officer

03 Jul 2018

Previously, Yang Co-founded AdColony, A Mobile Video Advertising Company, Which Was Sold For $350 Million to Opera Software in 2014
Scaling blockchain to match the speed of programmatic was always going to require technological expertise, buy-in from the advertising industry at large, and a meticulous attention to process and operations.
Which is why, today, we are pleased to announce the addition of Nikao Yang as Chief Operating Officer at Lucidity.
Yang is responsible for recruiting and sustaining relationships with existing clients and partners and driving all aspects of the company’s operation, while maintaining Lucidity’s growth and strategy.
Bringing a wealth of experience in the technology, marketing, and digital advertising industries, Yang’s network connections from his work with AdColony will assist in strengthening Lucidity’s core business and continue to develop our tentpole position in the marketplace.
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
“The blockchain and digital advertising industries are constantly evolving and growing, with Lucidity in the lead,” said Yang. “I am looking forward to working closely with the team to grow and expand the company, and to drive adoption of our protocol by advertisers and publishers who believe in transacting with transparency.”
Prior to joining Lucidity, Yang co-founded AdColony, a mobile video advertising company, which was sold for $350 million to Opera Software in 2014. At AdColony, Yang led teams responsible for business development, marketing, sales and operations from launch through the company’s acquisition and integration into Opera. Prior to AdColony, he held marketing and strategy roles at Toyota Motor Sales, Del Monte Foods and the Walt Disney Company.
“At Lucidity, we pride ourselves on being leaders of the blockchain industry, with a proven product and a growing list of partners and clients,” said Sam Kim, CEO & Co-founder of Lucidity. “We will benefit greatly from Nikao’s expertise, and are excited for the year ahead.”
Since its inception, blockchain technology has been used to solve the advertising industry’s barriers, including billing reconciliation, transparency and black box issues. We’ve created a scalable, working, and open protocol which utilizes the Ethereum blockchain to solve issues in programmatic, as opposed to a platform that only works for a closed ad network.
Lucidity is a digital advertising blockchain protocol bringing transparency and trust to digital advertising. Lucidity is the market leader using blockchain technology for digital advertisers and publishers to mitigate fraud, transact with trust, and maximize ROI. Lucidity was founded to tap the power of blockchain and cryptography to deliver transparency to the digital advertising supply chain for a cleaner ecosystem in which honest players benefit the most. The company is based in Los Angeles.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections


