Next Step In The Microdrones And Trimble Partnership: Seamless Integration With Trimble Business Center Software

01 Mar 2018

As the preferred provider of Vertical Take Off and Landing drone systems to the Trimble network of geospatial dealers, Microdrones is pleased to report its progress on this partnership to date.
Since October of 2016, Microdrones has signed more than 35 Trimble dealers worldwide. The Microdrones presence through Trimble now spans all seven continents, with a trusted and established sales force working to educate, train, sell and support end users on the benefits of Microdrones solutions.
To that end, Microdrones has launched three product lines to its Trimble dealer network:
mdMapper, for unmanned aerial photogrammetry
mdLiDAR, for unmanned aerial LiDAR applications
mdTector, for methane gas detection
“At Microdrones, we don’t just sell drones,” explains company President, Vivien Heriard-Dubreuil, adding “We sell fully integrated solutions that consist of unmanned aircraft, perfectly integrated sensors, software, workflow and training. What are we really selling? The ability to consistently deliver accurate, reliable, results.”
Mike Hogan
Mike Hogan, Sales Director for the Americas, added “Our new mdLiDAR1000 system is especially exciting for our dealers and their customers. The workflow is easy and intuitive: plan, fly, process and visualize. It’s fast, efficient, effective, and for what the deliverables provide, reasonably priced.”
Phil Kern
Phil Kern, Trimble Dealer Manager for Microdrones explains, “The next step in this integration of technology and business is well on its way. The Trimble Business Center is a one-stop-shop- a suite of indispensable software for those in the Trimble ecosystem. That’s why Microdrones is extending its workflow and software for all products to seamlessly integrate with Trimble Business Center. It’s a big project and our software, development and solutions teams are working hard in the field and our offices worldwide to do just that.”
Microdrones is planning to include this functionality in its end of February software release. Mike Hogan adds, “It’s important to our Trimble network, so it’s important to us. We don’t need to be the first to announce integration into this suite, but you can bet that we’ll be the first trusted to do it the right way. Trust in doing things right is why we’ve built such a strong global network of dealers.”


