Sentera Sensors Transform DJI Inspire 2 Drone Into Indispensable Crop-scouting Tool

11 Nov 2017

Interchangeable precision sensors allow for diverse data capture using a single drone
Sentera announced today availability of gimbaled Double 4k and Quad sensors for the popular DJI Inspire 2 drone. Sentera’s swappable precision crop health sensors paired with the Inspire 2 offers agronomists, crop consultants, and growers an economical way to capture diverse vegetation indices such as normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) or normalized difference red edge (NDRE) data while investing in a single drone platform.
Sentera precision plug-and-play double 4K sensor transforms the DJI Inspire 2 drone into an indispensable crop-scouting tool.
Proven NDVI Upgrade Solutions
“Our customers experienced tremendous success during the 2017 growing season using our suite of sensor upgrades for DJI Phantom, Mavic, and Inspire 1 drones,” remarked Kris Poulson, vice president of agriculture for Sentera. “Integration of our gimbaled Double 4K and Quad sensors with the Inspire 2 is a fitting next step that allows customers to leverage the same radiometrically accurate data from our sensors, but now with all the added benefits the Inspire 2 platform has to offer – most noticeably being longer flight times and swappable payloads.”
Seamless Integration
Using plug-and-play technology, Sentera’s sensors easily connect to the Inspire 2 in just a few seconds. Poulson explains why this is important to users: “Being able to swap payloads on-the-fly gives our customers the ability to decide what crop health indices they want to collect while they are in the field. If you’re an advisor and support multiple growers in a single day, this flexibility of data capture increases operational efficiency and allows you to completely customize a crop scouting mission based on specifications unique to your application and needs.”
Industry Leading Sensors
Sentera’s Double 4K and Quad sensors feature high radiometric accuracy and are the only plug-and-play, gimbaled multispectral sensors available today for the DJI Inspire family.
The Double 4K sensor is equipped with twin 12MP sensors and is capable of collecting various combinations of RGB, NDVI, NDRE, or multispectral vegetative indices in a single flight.
The Quad sensor has 1.2MP imagers with virtually limitless custom filtering options, an ideal solution for universities, researchers, large growers, and advisors with specialized data-gathering requirements.
Easy Connection, Single Flight Capture
“There is no downtime or need to send a drone to Sentera or a dealer to swap sensors. In seconds users can attach our Double 4K or Quad sensor to the DJI Inspire 2’s existing mount and be scouting fields immediately, capturing RGB, NDVI, and NDRE data. No additional tools or cables are required,” explains Poulson.
The gimbaled sensors quickly connect into the drone’s camera socket without adjustments. While in flight, the sensor automatically captures crop health data in a single pass and according to the user’s desired flight parameters.
The DJI Inspire 2 with gimbaled Double 4K Sensor upgrade will be on display in Sentera’s booth, #7 at the DJI AirWorks Conference taking place at the Denver Sheraton Downtown Hotel in Denver, Colorado, November 7-9.


