Anagog Named 2018 BIG Innovation Award Winner By Business Intelligence Group

15 Feb 2018

Anagog Ltd. Is The Developer Of JedAI, The On-Handset Mobility Status AI Engine, And BIsense, The Big Data Analytics Solution That Delivers, Analyzes, And Compares Footfall Information For Any Geographical Area, Based On Anonymized Foot-Traffic Data
Anagog Ltd. announced it has been named a winner in the 2018 BIG Innovation Awards presented by the Business Intelligence Group.
Anagog Ltd. is the developer of JedAI, the on-handset mobility status AI engine, and BIsense, the big data analytics solution that delivers, analyzes, and compares footfall information for any geographical area, based on anonymized foot-traffic data.
Anagog’s technology analyzes multiple on-handset sensor signals to deliver a better understanding of where the handset owner is, what activity they are doing, and what they will likely do next—all accomplished with ultra-low power consumption. Anagog collects and analyzes billions of anonymous sensor readings everyday on a global basis, including time-contextual inputs from onboard sensors such as accelerometers, barometers, WiFi, Bluetooth, GPS, and more. These analytics provide the highest number of real-time and predictive mobility statuses per user.
Combined with sophisticated machine learning algorithms, the contextual data collected can be used to significantly improve the user’s experience with richer personalized services that are offered at the right time and place.
Ofer Tziperman
“Anagog’s BIsense analytics tool allows any business around the world to better understand their own performance and compare it with the nearby competition, get insights about their guests’ habits and preferences, and drive more traffic to their branch,” stated Ofer Tziperman, CEO of Anagog. “The combination of Anagog’s powerful anonymized big data and advanced analytics dashboard is a crucial advantage for any brick-and-mortar business.”
Maria Jimenez
“This year’s winners show the diversity of innovation and its impact on the economy, our cultures, and the world as a whole,” said Maria Jimenez, chief operating officer of the Business Intelligence Group. “We are thrilled to be honoring Anagog as they are leading by example and making real progress on improving the daily lives of so many.”
Organizations from across the globe submitted their recent innovations for consideration in the 2018 BIG Innovation Awards. Nominations were then judged by a select group of business leaders and executives who volunteer their time and expertise to score submissions and provide feedback.


