AI Pioneer Raiven Healthcare Joins Forces With VPAC To Improve Mental Health Screening, Diagnosis And Treatment

06 Mar 2018

Raiven Healthcare, an artificial intelligence (AI) company providing real-time clinical treatment pathways, today announced a strategic partnership with Virtual Psych Assessment Center (VPAC).
VPAC enables behavioral health organizations to collect self-reported patient data through electronic behavioral assessment tools to determine diagnoses recommendations prior to the initial patient encounter. Raiven provides the predictive analytics after the VPAC screening and mental health diagnosis, suggesting the treatment pathway that delivers the best outcome at the optimum cost for a specific patient.
Jim Stefansic
“This partnership unites two organizations with a mutual purpose to accurately diagnose and treat those suffering from mental health issues, behavioral problems, and stress related conditions,” stated Dr. Jim Stefansic, President and CEO of Raiven. “Together we are creating a data-driven technology platform that is both easy to use and provides meaningful analysis in real-time at the initial point of patient care.”
The collaboration between Raiven and VPAC is noteworthy in that there are currently few mental health platforms on the market for providers that perform screening, diagnosis and optimal treatment pathways based on a variety of data sources, including social determinants of health. As part of the partnership, VPAC has made an equity investment in Raiven.
“We are excited to work with VPAC given their clinical expertise and understanding of mental health and stress related issues facing millions of individuals in our nation today,” said Dr. Stefansic. “With VPAC, we have found a partner that has a technology platform built to help us collect and process critical data needed to drive more meaningful, accurate machine learning decision making in healthcare.”
According to Paul Harris, President and CEO of VPAC, “Better mental health access leading to the right treatment and the best outcomes is at the forefront of everything that VPAC does. We have entered this partnership with Raiven to develop the most advanced screening, diagnosis and analytics platform in the mental health space, built on years of expertise and understanding by our combined teams.”


