Mobile World Congress 2018: Highlights From The Pre-show

23 Feb 2018

Mobile World Congress, The World’s Largest Gathering For The Mobile Industry, Takes Place 26 February – 1 March 2018 in Barcelona. Here are some highlights from the pre-show where companies like Lenovo, hoopo, ImmerVision had some big news to share.
hoopo Provides Low-Power Geolocation Solutions for IoT
In an effort to radically improve precision for low-power Internet of Things (IoT) tracking, hoopo today announced the launch of the company and its innovative, accurate geolocation solution for low-power wide area (LPWA) networks. The company also announced it has received $1.5 million in funding to further grow its business from a group of investors, including the initial investors in Mobileye; noted Israeli investor Zohar Gilon; and Ben Marcus, CEO of AirMap.
Lenovo Data Center Group Further Accelerates IoT Focus
The expanded Lenovo telecom organization will focus on creating joint innovation platforms to deliver customer-centric solutions, building on Lenovo’s unparalleled expertise in reliable standards-based hardware. As 5G deployment plans further solidify across the globe, Lenovo will build and partner on NFV hardware and software solutions based on The Open Compute Project and other standards.
In the newly created IoT division, Lenovo will help customers turn their traditional end-points into smart and connected devices, transforming them into analytical engines to further drive productivity and efficiency. Lenovo will focus on embedding server-class equipment in IoT solutions to enhance connectivity and build a set of edge platforms that can analyze massive amounts of data for real time decision making – all while tightly aligning with system integrators and other Lenovo partners to bring full vertical solutions to market.
Automotive Edge Computing Consortium Shifts Connected Car Market into High Gear
AT&T, DENSO, Ericsson, Intel, KDDI, NTT, NTT DOCOMO, Sumitomo Electric, Toyota, and Toyota InfoTechnology Center Form Alliance to Drive Ecosystem toward a Big Data Future. The Automotive Edge Computing Consortium (AECC) today announced it has formally launched operations as a cross-industry alliance. The AECC calls upon technology and solutions providers to join the consortium’s efforts to ensure that new technologies and standards will meet the future needs of the connected car value chain. The consortium brings together most respected and accomplished leaders from across the automotive, information technology, telecommunications, and cloud computing sectors to collaborate on the network and computing infrastructures and standards needed to support the coming big data explosion.
LetinAR Co., Ltd. Presents Optic Technology to Breakthrough Limits of Augmented Reality
Multiple Augmented Reality Glasses which are considered as a major candidate for next-generation wearable devices have been released for last few years by tech-giants such as Google and Microsoft. However, over-sized form factor and weight, a cause of dizziness, limited resolution are considered as difficulties for commercialization. In spite of various attempts, the limits stand unresolved because of complicated optical systems making it more difficult for mass production.
This year, LetinAR Co., Ltd. attending MWC for the first time challenges long-standing problems of Augmented Reality by introducing novel optical technology.
The technology of LetinAR provides 70 degrees of Field of View, which has never been achieved before in a size of a pair of normal glasses. A manufacturer can extend Field of View (FOV) effectively by arranging more pin mirrors in a single lens.
ImmerVision to Showcase AI-Ready Vision Technology
ImmerVision, a technology company enabling intelligent vision in all the world’s devices, announced today that it is uniquely prepared to provide AI-ready, data-rich image processing to today’s most incisive device makers and manufacturers. Indeed, ImmerVision is already providing such hyper-intelligent image capture capabilities to some of the world’s top brands.
Based in Montreal, Canada, ImmerVision develops wide-angle panomorph lenses and data-augmented imaging algorithms, enabling creative manufacturers to see more and smarter while creating professional and consumer devices.
ImmerVision lenses capture top-resolution images and videos, while imaging algorithms collect and embed valuable contextual information synched into every image. The combination of significantly higher image quality and richer data enables more precise analysis from any AI system.
Read More: Look Who’s Speaking At The Mobile World Congress 2018


