The Path To Competing In The Digital Age Will Drive The Discussion At HMG Strategy’s Upcoming CIO Leadership Conference

14 Apr 2018

Prominent CIOs scheduled to speak at the 2018 Chicago CIO Executive Leadership Summit will include Nancy Berce, CIO, Johnson Controls; Donagh Herlihy, EVP Digital & Chief Information Officer, Bloomin’ Brands; Paul Martin, SVP & CIO, Baxter International; and Yvonne Scott, CIO, Crowe Horwath LLP
Digital technologies are causing profound shifts in how businesses are being operated and new services that are being delivered to attract new customers. The steps being taken by forward-looking CIOs to execute on digital transformation strategies and the courageous leadership that’s needed in working with the C-suite and board of directors to execute effectively on these initiatives will dominate the discussion at the upcoming 2018 Chicago CIO Executive Leadership Summit, produced by HMG Strategy, to be held on May 8, 2018 at the Hilton Palmer House in Chicago, IL.
Hunter Muller
“CIOs are at the center of digital transformation,” said Hunter Muller, HMG Strategy’s President and CEO. “Because of this, he or she is uniquely positioned to deliver fearless leadership, meld emerging technologies with process redesign and people skills, and partner with the C-suite and the board to guide the enterprise into the future.”
The Chicago CIO Executive Leadership Summit will kick-off with a series of compelling ‘HMG Tech Talk’ discussions that will explore the business, technology, and geo-political trends that are influencing executive strategy.
Other captivating sessions at the summit will include an executive panel that will explore how advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, the Internet of Things, and analytics are driving speed to market and a competitive edge; an executive panel that will discuss their roles in leading digital transformation strategies and how they’re working with fellow members of the C-suite to propel the business forward; a panel of leading search executives who will weigh in on the key attributes that make technology executives successful; a set of executive roundtable discussions that enable summit attendees to brainstorm on the top opportunities for applying technologies such as AI, blockchain and cloud applications along with the top challenges that must be overcome to succeed; followed by an executive panel that will share experiences of how courageous leadership can generate new waves of business growth.
Distinguished speakers at the summit will include:
Wes Arens, Former Amazon Executive and Digital Business Model Strategist, Wes Arens Advisors, LLC
Scott Berkey, CIO, Illinois Housing Development Authority
Monica Caldas, CIO, Global Services & Digital Solutions, GE Transportation
Kelly Lyman, CIO-PECO, VP IT Real Time Strategy, Exelon
Platinum Partners for the Chicago Summit include Adobe. Gold Partners include Comcast Business, The Judge Group Neudesic, and Pure Storage. The Digital Cybersecurity Partner of the Year includes SecurityScorecard. Strategic Partners include Egon Zehnder, Heidrick & Struggles, Korn Ferry, Russell Reynolds Associates, and Spencer Stuart. Alliance Partners include Amplify Partners, Glynn Capital, Greylock Partners, Lightspeed Venture Partners, and Sequoia. Association Partners include SIM Chicago.
HMG Strategy is the world’s largest independent and most trusted provider of executive networking events and thought leadership to support the 360-degree needs of technology leaders. Our regional CIO and CISO Executive Leadership Series, newsletters, authored books, and online Resource Center deliver proprietary research on leadership, innovation, transformation, and career ascent.


