International Blockchain Association – The World’s First Industry Body For The Blockchain Industry

19 Mar 2018

The International Blockchain Association (IBA), The Global Industry Body For The Blockchain Industry, Launches Today
The IBA is the first international self-regulating body for the blockchain industry. The IBA aims to enhance the integrity of the industry, engage and collaborate with governments and regulators globally, and to promote trust and transparency amongst its members.
IBA membership will be available to all industry participants. Currently structured with three types of membership, all members will be required to adhere to the IBA Code of Conduct and any applicable IBA Market Practice Guidance. The IBA is self regulating to the extent that members will be expected to adhere to the IBA Rules.
CEO Marcus Zaman commented, “The IBA aims to build trust at all levels in this rapidly evolving industry, as well as providing a unified voice for our members to ensure future developments for the industry are fair and balanced.The blockchain industry is borderless, and so too is the IBA. We have received incredible support from industry leaders globally and are excited to progress to the next stages of development.”
The International Blockchain Association (“IBA”) is the independent, self-regulatory organisation for the blockchain industry.
The IBA has been founded to;
enhance market integrity through trust and transparency;
engage and collaborate with governments and regulators on behalf of IBA members; and
actively contribute to the responsible, balanced development of the industry.
The IBA recognises the challenges posed by the rapidly evolving industry and considerable variation in the application of blockchain technology. Much like the technology itself, the industry must be regulated on a global scale. The IBA proposes a collaborative, consistent approach to self-regulation of the industry internationally.
The IBA intends to add common standards to the industry though the introduction of the IBA Code of Conduct and IBA Market Practice Guidance. By creating a comprehensive framework of legal analysis and opinions, the IBA further aims to add to legal certainty for members if all jurisdictions.


