XIMANTIS Innovates Traffic Forecasting With AI – Stochastic Algorithm Targeting Reduction In Congestion And Emissions

21 Mar 2018

Patent granted; invitations and interest are extended for opportunities to impact the escalating congestion and emissions issues in mega-cities; Ximantis welcomes proposals for pilot demonstration
XIMANTIS AB, A Swedish start-up announces the successful integration of Machine Learning with stochastic modelling technologies and data analytics, generating greatly improved traffic forecasts, aiming at reducing congestion and emissions. Presently, Ximantis welcomes invitations and proposals from cities around the world for a pilot demonstration of its innovative software to mitigate congestion and air quality issues.
Intelligent Traffic Solutions to impact Congestion and Emissions in cities around the world.
Ximantis is a smart, green, software technologies company offering AI solutions and Data Analytics in the fields of Mobility, Connected Cars, and Smart Cities.
George Sopasakis
“What we are talking about here is our unique ability to pinpoint future congestion at any given road, with high accuracy, while managing commuter traffic to an extend that lessens gridlock impact. We optimize each individual vehicle’s route against surrounding traffic. We provide highly accurate ETAs, times of departure, and congestion rerouting,” said Mr. George Sopasakis, CTO of Ximantis. “It’s a virtual AI traffic control system interacting real-time with individual vehicles or connected cars, and traffic control centers.”
The company was recently granted a China patent. Ximantis’s traffic jam mitigation technology is of direct commercial relevance to China’s ambitions in the Smart-City / Smart-Transportation sectors.
Mr. Sopasakis, invited by the Qingdao municipal government and other officials, travelled to China to present during the 2017 Qingdao International Technology Transfer Conference & Aoshan Forum for Eurasia on Science and Technology. Showcasing the initial promising results integrating AI with stochastic modelling technologies, he provided solutions for researchers, industry, and government during private discussions leading to offers.
China allocates 450 billion yuan annually to the transportation sector alone. Ximantis’s patented technology can save billions while potentially impacting all related areas of concern. The three-week trip was facilitated by Sinan Compass, UK. Negotiations are currently ongoing with a follow up trip planned for this Spring.
Following a successful CES-2018 exhibit, Ximantis is also considering collaborations and opportunities from California to Norway. Governments have prioritized investment in AI. Urban development has contributed to increased concerns about environmental pollution and congestion. Currently there are no effective market strategies for complex dynamic environments as city traffic. The Ximantis’s AI-solution is regarded a promising, disruptive approach to an otherwise dead-end problem.
“There is nothing like it out there,” remarked Mr. Sopasakis. “Many companies tell you that they predict traffic congestion. What they don’t tell you is that they use deterministic methods to describe a chaotic phenomenon, making their solutions unfit for purpose. And then people wonder why nothing is working with traffic, why congestion is only getting worst.”


