Pegasus Food Futures Unveil Plans To Use AI To Transform The Future Of Agriculture

15 Feb 2018

Pegasus Food Futures Showcased Their Pioneering Hydroponic Farming Facilities At The Global Forum For Innovations In Agriculture
Leading owner and operator of hydroponic farming facilities in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, Pegasus Food Futures showcased their pioneering hydroponic farming facilities at the Global Forum for Innovations in Agriculture (GFIA) Exhibition in Abu Dhabi on February 5th and 6th and unveiled ambitious plans for future expansion in 2018.
With the world population set to grow from current levels of 7.3 billion to 8.5 billion by 2030 and 11.2 billion by 2100, ensuring long term food security has never been more important. Providing an affordable and reliable food source that is also environmentally sustainable is essential to meet the needs of the growing population. Pegasus Food Futures provides solutions for these global food supply challenges through its operations and innovations in farming, livestock, feed stock and food production.
Their primary goal is to provide security for our food and agricultural future. Through continued investment into hydroponic farming technology, techniques and innovation they aim to support food security by growing sustainable and consistent produce that offers consumers a high quality, reasonably priced and fresh harvest each and every time.
At GFIA, the Pegasus team was on hand to talk to hundreds of potential investors from a diverse array of backgrounds, along with many representatives from the UAE Ministry of the Abu Dhabi Food Control Authority and UAE Ministry of Climate Change and Environment during the two day conference. There was considerable interest in the plans to create an agricultural city in UAE and the upcoming launch of PICCD hydroponically grown strawberries and salad leaves in the UK, the GCC and Asia.
Mahmood Almas, Chairman and Founder of Pegasus Agriculture was excited by the reaction from GFIA attendees: “We were overwhelmed with the positive responses from the delegates at GFIA. There was much interest from businesses in the retail and wholesale sectors in securing produce from our farms for their consumers across the GCC.”


