Visual BI Solutions Announces Its Participation In BI And Analytics Conference

20 Feb 2018

Visual BI Solutions Will Showcase their End-to-End BI Capabilities and Product Offerings
Visual BI Solutions, an SAP Partner and a specialized player in Business Intelligence (BI) and Analytics, today announced their participation in BI and Analytics Conference being held this year at Huntington Beach, CA between February 19-21. They will be exhibiting at Booth #3.
This year, Visual BI will be exhibiting their End-to-End BI capabilities ranging from Quick-Start Programs, Migration, Training, Consulting and SAP Certified Product Extensions. In addition, participants will also have a chance to explore their innovative Product offerings like Visual BI Extensions for SAP Lumira Designer (VBX 2.2), Value Driver Tree, VBI View and Document Management for SAP Lumira.
Gopal Krishnamurthy
“BI and Analytics Conference is going to be a great platform for us to showcase our innovations, customer experiences & success stories in SAP’s BI portfolio covering SAP Business Warehouse, SAP BusinessObjects and SAP HANA,” said Gopal Krishnamurthy, Founder/CEO, Visual BI Solutions.
A leading SAP-certified BI Enablement firm, VISUAL BI provides strategic consulting, software and solutions that achieve agile, mobile, self-service and real-time BI. Some of the world’s largest firms look to us for strategies & solutions to drive BI adoption through actionable insights and advanced visualizations.
Formerly SABOC, BI+A is a celebration of the people, technology, ideas, and innovations that are literally transforming the way we live and work. This conference gives you access to global thought leaders, local peers, and industry experts using BusinessObjects and the full range of SAP’s analytics and reporting tools.
SAP products and services mentioned herein as well as their respective logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of SAP SE (or an SAP affiliate company) in Germany and other countries.
The BI + Analytics Conference brings together a community of users, experts and thought-leaders leveraging SAP BusinessObjects and SAP BI business solutions to drive insights and decisions within their organizations. Attendees have responsibility in leading their company’s analytics, reporting, data and BI tools and join us from a variety industries including healthcare, energy, consumer products and more.
Read More: Interview With Tomer Kashi, Co-Founder & CEO, SkyWatch


