Kyvos Insights To Present Sessions At Tableau Conference 2017

06 Oct 2017

Sessions Will Include a Joint Presentation with Adobe, a Kyvos Insights Customer that Delivered Self-Service, Interactive Business Intelligence to Hundreds of Concurrent Tableau Users 
Kyvos Insights, a big data analytics company, announced that it will present two sessions at Tableau Conference 2017, held October 9-12 at the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino in Las Vegas.  A Megabyte Sponsor of the conference, Kyvos Insights will also offer demonstrations of Kyvos 4.0 – the new groundbreaking version of its massively scalable, self-service analytics solution that empowers enterprises to create data cubes with near limitless scalability and performance – at booth 420.
Kyvos Insights’ sessions at the conference include:
Kyvos: Interactive BI at Massive Scale at Adobe
With multiple business systems and massive increases in data volume, Adobe was faced with the challenge of building a big data infrastructure that would provide consistent, accurate and instant answers to their executive team and across the business. Existing systems were not able to deal with the scale and granularity of the data, and the requirement for providing response times in seconds. Delivering self-service, interactive access to hundreds of Tableau users was a key requirement. Leaders from Adobe and Kyvos Insights, a key partner, will describe Adobe’s big data journey and the steps it took to deliver on these goals. The hour-long session will take place on Tuesday, October 10, at 3:30 p.m. Pacific time.
Kyvos: Tableau on Big Data With Interactive Response Times
Business users have struggled in the past, trying to connect Tableau to their data on Hadoop and experiencing significant performance issues. With the combination of Kyvos and Tableau, Tableau users can now get high performance access to massive amounts of data on Hadoop with instant response times. Kyvos provides seamless integration with Tableau, enabling users to explore, slice and dice, drill down and analyze their data on Hadoop directly from their Tableau visualizations. In this talk Ajay Anand will examine customer use cases and architectures for eliminating performance bottlenecks and delivering high performance, self-service access to Big Data across the enterprise.  The half-hour long presentation will take place on Tuesday, October 10, at 12:15 p.m. Pacific time.
“Tableau Conference 2017 is a perfect venue to share how we’re working with innovative customers like Adobe to redefine what is possible with big data,” said Ajay Anand, vice president of products at Kyvos Insights. “We’re increasingly seeing data sets with hundreds of billions of rows and hundreds of dimensions and measures.  Our technology enables organizations to construct a BI Consumption Layer that allows hundreds of Tableau users to run queries with response times in seconds on massive volumes, while simultaneously maintaining the fine-grained security the most stringent enterprises demand.”
Star Schema Benchmark data has shown that query times when using Kyvos are, on average, 100 times faster than native SQL queries on Hadoop, with minimal degradation in performance as hundreds and even thousands of concurrent users across the enterprise are added.


