Fanisko Named Online Augmented Reality Partner For IPL’s Chennai Super Kings

18 May 2018

Fans can download a free new app from Google Play that uses real-time face effects to add colorful CSK-inspired flair to selfies and groupies.
Fanisko, a unique one-stop fan engagement platform that helps sports and entertainment brands increase mobile fan retention, digital engagement and revenue opportunities, announced today it has been named the online Augmented Reality partner for the Chennai Super Kings (CSK) of the Indian Premier League (IPL).
As a result of the new partnership with CSK’s technology division, TekPlay, fans can download a free new app that uses real-time face effects to add colorful CSK-inspired flair to selfies and groupies. Fanisko is also working on apps for face swapping, facemasks, face frames, selfies with a player, and other Augmented Reality fan engagement offerings.
“Both Fanisko and Chennai Super Kings emphasize innovation, and this exciting partnership will certainly bring fans closer to the team and the players. We are confident that other teams and leagues will follow suit,” commented Sathish Chittibabu, Fanisko’s Co-Founder and CEO.
The CSK AR app (#CSKARAPP) is currently available for Android devices from Google Play. Thousands of passionate CSK fans have already downloaded the app, and are sharing their love of the team with friends, fellow supporters and across social media.
Sathish Chittibabu
“We are thrilled to partner with Chennai Super Kings and offer Augmented Reality to over 20 million of their fans worldwide,” commented Sathish Chittibabu, Fanisko’s Co-Founder and CEO. “Both Fanisko and Chennai Super Kings emphasize innovation, and this exciting partnership will certainly bring fans closer to the team and the players. We are confident that other teams and leagues will follow suit.”
Fanisko’s innovative platform — which is called Fanisko | Engage™ — is an A.I.-powered back end plugin that infuses an app with the company’s patent-pending live hybrid fantasy game, plus personalized feeds, AR and VR gaming, and live play-by-play predictions. It also comprehensively tracks behavioral analytics so that teams and sponsors can understand their fans better, and ultimately transform loyal fans into digital diehards.


