[24]7.ai Appoints World-Renowned Advanced Mathematical Modeling Expert As Chief Data Scientist

22 Jun 2018

Cosimo Spera, Ph.D., to lead the company’s Data Sciences and AI vision
Follow Us
[24]7.ai, a global leader in intent-driven customer engagement solutions, today announced the appointment of Cosimo Spera, Ph.D., a NATO and Mine Fellow, as chief data scientist. [24]7.ai has invested heavily in AI-powered customer engagement solutions to redefine the customer experience. In his new role, Spera, a globally recognized expert in mathematical modeling, predictive analytics, and data science, will be responsible for leading the company’s data sciences and AI vision, reporting directly to [24]7.ai Chief Executive Officer PV Kannan.
Read More: World Economic Forum Announces Technology Pioneers 2018 That Will Change The World
Spera holds a doctorate in mathematics and statistics from the University of Siena, Italy, a doctorate in operation research from M.I.T. and held a post-doctoral position in operation research at Yale University. Prior to joining [24]7.ai, Spera was chief data scientist at SaltGrid where he was responsible for building and leading the data science team, driving the product vision and roadmap, and designing and deploying predictive models for health, safety and the environment. He engaged early customers like Chevron and American Petroleum Institute, to build the first product release in less than six months, with just four developers. He has held leadership roles at Innotas and Zephyr Health as well.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
“[24]7.ai has invested heavily in artificial intelligence to help companies determine consumer intent and improve customer experience,” said Kannan. “Cosimo’s deep research background and mathematical modeling expertise is going to help us extend that lead. His passion for building great teams and products will drive innovation that redefines the way companies interact with consumers.”
“[24]7.ai is a company that truly understands the power of data science and the incredible impact it can bring to real-world business applications,” said Spera. “I look forward to leading a world-class global team that is advancing artificial intelligence and driving innovation in the customer experience space.”
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu


