Vantage Network Welcomes ICO And Blockchain Expert David Drake To Its Advisory Board To Disrupt Charitable Giving

01 May 2018

The contribution-tracking blockchain project secures additional investor relations and international business development expertise during critical growth phase.
Vantage Network, the Contribution Tracking Platform that leverages blockchain technology to provide full transparency and traceability of contributions made to organizations and nonprofit entities, announced today that David Drake, a recognized expert in blockchain and cryptocurrency, has joined Vantage Network’s Board of Advisors.
David is an entrepreneur and investor with a long and impressive record of international business development. He is the Founder and Chairman at LDJ Capital, a multi-family office which deals in worldwide funds accessing over trillions in assets and maintains over 50+ global directors and family office partners.
David Drake
“Vantage Network is developing a means of using blockchain technology to aid the growth and mission of the nonprofit sector of the economy, which will be a big win for both nonprofit organizations and for donors,” says David. He adds, “The transparency and accountability of their mission carries the potential to increase the amount of charitable giving in general, while providing donors the satisfaction of knowing that their contributions truly are being put to good use. This is a compelling use of blockchain technology that does not require either party to own cryptocurrency. I’m looking forward to working with Vantage Network as they lead this charge toward transparency.”
More recently, David is also regarded as a leader in blockchain and cryptocurrency. He runs a $200M LDJ Cayman Fund focused on cryptocurrency, mining, and ICO acquisitions. David is an advocate of innovative investing in private equity, capital formation policies and developments globally. He collaborated on the 2011 JOBS Act to create new laws underlying all fundraising in the U.S. for all ICOs, which he lobbied for in the US Congress. Because of his leading work in this space, he represented the US Commerce Department at the EU Commission in Brussels and Rome in 2012 and was invited to the White House Champions of Change ceremony in Washington, D.C. and as a speaker at the UK Parliament in 2013.
“We’re looking forward to working with David and leveraging his knowledge and expertise with blockchain in this changing regulatory environment,” said Jeff Hood, Co-Founder of Vantage Network. “David’s investor relations skills and international business network will help Vantage Network execute on our mission to bring full transparency and accountability to nonprofit contributions, and grow our platform to extend our offerings to other types of organizations that want to take donations.”


