Drone Aviation Appoints Federal Information Technology Executive Robert J. Guerra To Board Of Directors

03 Apr 2018

Guerra Is A Highly-Respected Veteran In The Federal IT Community Whose Nearly 50-Year Career Includes Senior Executive Management And Sales Roles At IT Firms Serving The Federal Government
Drone Aviation Holding Corp (“Drone Aviation” or the “Company”), a manufacturer of tethered drones and lighter-than-air aerostats, today announced that it has appointed award-wining Federal Information Technology (“IT”) veteran Robert J. Guerra to the Company’s Board of Directors.
Guerra is a highly-respected veteran in the Federal IT community whose nearly 50-year career includes senior executive management and sales roles at IT firms serving the Federal Government including Agilex Technologies, Sysorex Information Systems Inc., Falcon Micro Systems, Xerox and Federal Data Corporation. Guerra is also a six-time recipient of Federal Computer Week’s Federal 100 awards which recognizes leading federal government and industry executives. Robert was also selected as the Federation of Information Processing Councils “Industry Executive of the Year” in 1997 and was also selected as one of the 50 most influential people in the federal IT community by Federal Computer Week.
“Throughout his career, Robert has consistently delivered results based upon his ability to understand a client’s needs while successfully navigating the complex Federal acquisition and contracting process. This experience and expertise is critical to our ability to expand our contracting operation and is a combination that can deliver significant value to our business,” said Jay Nussbaum, Chairman and CEO of Drone Aviation. “Robert’s addition to our Board represents another important step in the further advancement of our commercialization efforts and to our ongoing commitment to build an industry-leading organization.”
“The technical ability of a drone to collect and analyze information in real-time has the potential to dramatically impact every sector of the global economy. This creates opportunities for companies such as Drone Aviation that can cost effectively address both the critical security and business information challenges facing the world today,” added Guerra. “I am eager to join Drone Aviation and to assisting the Company in delivering value to its customers and shareholders.”
Guerra, President of Robert J. Guerra & Associates, has built a successful career in the Federal Information Technology community. An acknowledged industry leader and executive, Mr. Guerra has served as a founding board member of, and consultant to, Agilex Technologies where he assisted in the growth of the company prior to its acquisition by Accenture Federal Systems. Prior to that effort, Mr. Guerra was Executive Vice President of Sysorex Information Systems Inc. where he oversaw the identification, account development, contract capture, and contract implementation aspects of the company’s Federal IT business where he oversaw substantial revenue growth prior to its sale. He also served as Vice President of Strategic Programs at Falcon Micro Systems, a major provider of Information Technology solutions to Federal agencies and as President of Everex Federal Systems, leading the company’s substantial growth. Earlier, Robert spent fourteen years at Xerox Corporation where he served in numerous key Financial Planning and Control capacities. During his career at Federal Data Corporation he was involved in the sale of FDC’s client/server subsidiary to Everex Systems Inc. Mr. Guerra served as the founding President of the Bethesda/NIH chapter of the Armed Forces Communications & Electronics Association, and now serves on its Board of Directors. He is also actively involved in a number of non-profit organizations including having served as Chairman of the National Institutes of Health Children’s Inn Gala and on the Board of Directors of the Loudoun Abused Women’s Shelter.
Drone Aviation Holding Corp develops and manufactures cost-effective, compact and rapidly deployable aerial platforms, including lighter-than-air aerostats and electric-powered drones designed to provide government and commercial customers with enhanced surveillance and communication capabilities. Utilizing a patented tether system, Drone Aviation’s products are designed to provide prolonged operational duration capabilities combined with improved reliability, uniquely fulfilling critical requirements in military, law enforcement, commercial, and industrial applications.


