Eyeris Recognized As Finalist For Human Behavior Understanding AI At 2018 TU-Automotive Awards

24 May 2018

Eyeris in-cabin vision AI software suite enhances safety, comfort and convenience through multimodal analysis of occupants’ complex visual behavior inside autonomous and highly-automated vehicles
Eyeris, a world pioneer and leader in deep learning-based vision AI software for face analytics, emotion recognition, body pose, and human action and activity recognition for the automotive industry, today announced that it has been honored as a 2018 TU-Automotive Awards finalist in two categories for Best Auto Mobility Product or Service and Best Connected Product or Service. The TU-Automotive Awards are a highly regarded recognition of excellence, innovative technology, and leadership in the connected car industry. The winners will be announced at the TU-Automotive Awards ceremony on June 5, 2018 in Detroit, Mich.
This is the fourth consecutive year that Eyeris has been recognized as a finalist in the TU-Automotive Awards, including winning the Award for Best Connected Product or Service for the Commercial Market in 2017. Finalists are carefully selected by a panel of expert judges from the automotive industry based on four criteria: innovation, industry engagement, user experience, and market updates.
Eyeris offers the following new applications with its Human Behavior Understanding AI:
Safety—Eyeris Driver Monitoring AI augments advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS), enhances seamless human-machine interface (HMI) and enables safe transition between different levels of autonomy.
Comfort—Eyeris Occupants Monitoring AI offers in-cabin ambient intelligence and dynamic interior configurations such as lighting, seating, controls, etc.
Productivity—Eyeris HBU AI enables mobility-as-a-service providers with hyper-targeted demographics and unique qualitative behavior insights.
“We’re certain that human-centered interior vision AI will be groundbreaking in defining the future of a safer, more dynamic mobility in this new consumer space,” said Eyeris Founder and Chief Executive Officer Modar Alaoui.
“Additionally, we are excited that with the convergence of our comprehensive 2D-based face and body reading AI, Eyeris has the final critical piece of the ADAS puzzle to achieve the level of safety consumers and regulators expect from highly-automated vehicles,” commented Glen Carroll, Eyeris Chief Operating Officer.
Eyeris in-cabin vision AI solutions have been adopted by Toyota Motor Corporation, Jaguar Land Rover, Bosch, Honda Motor Co., Mitsubishi Motors Corporation, and Toyota Research Institute. Eyeris expects to go into vehicle mass production in 2019.


