E2open Names Jarett Janik As Chief Financial Officer

28 Jun 2018

E2open, the one place in the cloud to run your supply chain, announced the appointment of Jarett Janik to the position of Chief Financial Officer. In this role, Jarett will be responsible for E2open’s finance, IT, acquisition and business integration functions.
“Jarett is a valued and key addition to our leadership team here in Austin”
Michael Farlekas
“Jarett is a valued and key addition to our leadership team here in Austin,” said Michael Farlekas, Chief Executive Officer, E2open. “He brings extensive experience building and leading dynamic global teams across multiple disciplines while transforming process and performance. At E2open, he’ll lead our finance organization and support our strategic planning as we continue to grow our organization.”
Follow Us
Jarett has over 20 years of financial and operational experience managing teams across the globe. He was most recently the Chief Financial Officer at Forterro, a group of enterprise resource planning software businesses serving small to midmarket companies in Europe. Prior to Forterro, Janik held the position of Chief Financial Officer at Allegro, a provider of enterprise risk management and trading solutions for the energy industry. He has also held executive and senior finance positions at Infor during a period of tremendous growth, as well as Certegy and Netzee, Inc.
Read More: Quanergy Solid State LiDAR Wins Juniper Research Top Automotive Award
Jarett Janik
“I’m excited to bring my hands-on, energetic and motivational management style and global experience to a first-class team and group of leaders serving a most impressive customer base,” said Janik. “E2open is making supply chains far more agile, intelligent, collaborative, and automated for a broad customer base. As we continue to bring innovative technology to market and make supply chains smarter, we will continue to deliver greater value to our customers.”
Janik holds an MBA with a concentration in finance from University of Denver and a Bachelor of Science degree in business administration and tourism management from University of Denver.
Read More: Deloitte Government Human Capital Trends Reveal Need For Greater C-Suite Collaboration


