AutomateWork To Become Accelirate, Inc

23 Jan 2018

The Robotic Process Automation Leader Announces Name Change Effective this Year
AutomateWork, a Leader in the rapidly growing field of Robotic Process Automation and Artificial Intelligence has finalized a re-branding effort and will officially change its corporate name to Accelirate, Inc. this year. The name change reflects the company’s ongoing focus and commitment to accelerating Business Process Automation within the Enterprise and represents the growing adoption of these scalable automation processes in many verticals, including Fortune 500 Banking, Finance and Insurance industries.
Ahmed Zaidi
“Our new name, ‘Accelirate,’ allows us to emphasize our focus on how Enterprise AI and Automation initiatives are developed, delivered and governed within our client base,” said Ahmed Zaidi, Chief Automation Officer of Accelirate, Inc. “Accelirate is on a mission to accelerate our clients’ Return on Investment on their Automation and AI initiatives, rather than just talking about AI because it’s the next wave of technology for business.”
“Our business is disrupting traditional technologies and assisting our clients with fast-tracking their internal processes for better efficiency. Accelirate’s mission is, ‘Accelerating Automation,’ and we look forward to providing our clients with the same industry-leading service they expect from our team,” said Accelirate, Inc Managing Partner, Zia Bhutta.
For organizations looking to introduce a Digital Workforce, Accelirate, Inc. offers a flexible managed service that includes strategic vision and road-mapping, development and deployment of process automation, procurement of automation software, ongoing maintenance of automated processes, and an on-demand digital workforce that can be scaled up or down based on budgets and requirements.
Accelirate, Inc provides Strategy and Road Map development, Process Analysis, Business Process Automation Implementation and ROI models for the Enterprise. Delivery teams work closely with clients to choose the appropriate Process Automation tools, establish Governance, Implement Automation and train staff. The company also manages, monitors and optimizes the Automated Process and implements enhancements where needed.


