Shakepay Launches Private Beta Of Cryptocurrency Mobile Wallet For Canadian Market

23 Feb 2018

The Company Successfully Raised $1 Million In Investment Funding After An Impressive 60% Month-Over-Month Growth In Volume Of Transactions In 2017
Shakepay, a Montreal-based fintech startup connecting users with their digital money, today announced the beta launch of its latest platform, a multi-currency, peer-to-peer mobile wallet that allows Canadians to buy and sell Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. Shakepay users can now purchase Bitcoin directly from their phones with just one click.
Built for mobile, the platform also allows users to send and request Canadian Dollars and Bitcoin, directly on the app, to and from other Shakepay users. Funds are added to their Shakepay mobile wallets via Interac e-transfers, an especially convenient method for those just getting started with digital assets. Users can also cash out their CAD balances to their Canadian bank accounts, with their funds being deposited within 24 hours. Shakepay charges a competitive 1.75% fee on top of BTC-to-CAD and CAD-to-BTC market rates.  There is no fee to send and receive CAD and BTC to and from other Shakepay users. Additionally, Shakepay does not charge users a fee to transfer CAD to their mobile wallets.
Jean Amiouny
“We’re seeing a huge rate of adoption in the cryptocurrency space and we’re excited to launch the new Shakepay product to the Canadian market, one that is severely underserved,” said Jean Amiouny, Co-Founder and CEO. “Shakepay is the fastest way for Canadians to buy and sell digital currencies directly from their mobile phones.”
Shakepay has recently joined the sixth cohort of Creative Destruction Lab at the Rotman School of Management at the University of Toronto. “CDL connects us with seasoned Canadian entrepreneurs to help us turn Shakepay from a startup to a high-growth company,” said Roy Breidi, Co-Founder at Shakepay. “We are committed to working towards a seamless crossover between the current financial system and the digital asset world. We are driven to build products that meet the exploding consumer demand in the space.”
Shakepay was founded in 2015 by Jean Amiouny, CEO, and Roy Breidi, CTO. Under their leadership, the company successfully raised $1 million last year in venture capital from Boost VC, Amphora Capital, and a handful of angel investors.
Shakepay, a financial services company based in Montreal, powers transactions for thousands of users worldwide using blockchain technologies. The company was founded in 2015 by two McGill University alumnae: Jean Amiouny, CEO, is a Next 36 Canadian entrepreneur and guest lecturer at McGill University Faculties of Law and Management; and Roy Breidi, CTO, worked as a technology associate at Morgan Stanley.
Read More: Prophesee Announces Initial Closing Of $19M Funding


