30+ Experts To Speak At The First Artificial Intelligence (AI) Virtual Summit

18 Jun 2018

Speakers From Top Organizations Like Marketo, SBI, Sandler Training And Drift To Share How Artificial Intelligence Is Delivering Real And Measurable Growth For Businesses Large And Small. 
Over 30 sales and marketing leaders from top organizations will gather in June for the InsideSales.com virtual AI Growth Summit, the first-ever event dedicated to sales and marketing leaders using artificial intelligence. The speakers will share their experiences and knowledge on applying Artificial Intelligence (AI) in their company, and will discuss revenue growth results.
Sales and marketing leaders, as well as other subject matter experts from companies like Marketo, SBI, Zetta Venture Partners, Sales for Life, Nudge.ai, Conversica, Sandler Training and Drift, have announced they will participate in this one-of-a kind event.
Attendees can learn from experienced business leaders well versed in implementing AI solutions in sales and marketing teams, such as:
Matt Dixon, chief product and research officer for Tethr
Co-author of The Challenger Sale, The Challenger Customer and The Effortless Experience; frequent contributor to Harvard Business Review; experienced advisor to senior executives on sales, service and customer experience.
Read More: Scale To Discuss How Self-Driving Cars Will Handle Unexpected Real-World Scenarios At The Information’s Autonomous Vehicles Summit
Mark Gorenberg, founder and managing director for Zetta Venture Partners
Mark Gorenberg is the Founder and a Managing Director of Zetta Venture Partners, a seed and early-stage fund, focused on the intelligent enterprise.
Mark started his venture capital career when Hummer Winblad Venture Partners began investing its first fund in 1990. Over the last 20 years Mark has served on the boards of numerous successful Hummer Winblad start-ups, including Omniture (IPO; subsequently acquired by Adobe), AdForce (IPO; subsequently acquired by CMGI), NetDynamics (acquired by Sun Microsystems), Scopus Technologies (IPO; subsequently acquired by Siebel) and Crowdfactory (acquired by Marketo). He continues to serve as a director of various companies including analytics companies Domo, Domino Data Lab, Follow Analytics, InsideSales, and Teem.
Dave Mattson, CEO and president of Sandler Training
Dave Mattson is a best-selling author, sales and management thought leader, keynote speaker and leader for sales training seminars around the world. As CEO and President of Sandler Training, Mr. Mattson oversees the corporate direction and strategy for the company’s global operations including sales, marketing, consulting, alliances and support. His key areas of focus are sales leadership, strategy and client satisfaction.
Since joining Sandler in 1988, Mr. Mattson has guided the firm to its position as a global provider of sales and management training with over 250 operating units in 25 countries. Under his leadership, the company has also been recognized four times in the Top 20 Sales Training Companies by TrainingIndustry.com, and nine times by Entrepreneur magazine’s “Franchise 500” as the number-one sales training company in the United States.
Josh Horstmann, VP of sales at Sales Benchmark Index
Josh Horstmann is the SVP at Sales Benchmark Index (SBI), He helps B2B companies make the revenue number.
He has spent his career building and transforming sales organizations. If you are a Private Equity firm, a CEO, or a sales and marketing executive, we share a lot of the same experiences. I would like to share with you what I have learned about
Nina Church-Adams, SVP of marketing for Act-On Software
Nina Church-Adams is a senior marketing leader with more than 14 years of experience building teams, products and brands. She considers herself a right and left brain marketer who delights equally in the creative process as well as the nuts and bolts of planning and execution needed to deliver operational success – from launching new brands to driving demand gen engines.
My success leading global cross-functional teams through product launches, go-to-market transformations, and organizational transitions stems from my strengths as a storyteller who can align a diverse team around a shared vision and as a facilitator who can harness and focus a team’s creativity, she writes in her LinkedIn bio.
Read More: Jane.Ai Launches To Eliminate Wasted Time In The Workplace By Putting The Power Of Artificial Intelligence At The Fingertips Of All Employees
David Elkington
“AI is a major trend, and business leaders need to know what it is and how they can use it to grow their business. This is the first event of its kind dedicated to AI for sales and marketing, and I’m thrilled to see so many leaders and industry experts tell their stories on how artificial intelligence has helped them grow their business,” said Dave Elkington, CEO of InsideSales.com. “For many, seeing actual implementation strategies and real results, rather than just hype, will help increase adoption of and confidence in AI capabilities.”
The AI Growth Summit is a virtual event hosted by the No. 1 artificial intelligence (AI) growth platform for sales, InsideSales.com. During the summit, the company will also publish its latest research report, “The State of AI for Sales and Marketing.” The survey of hundreds of leaders will attempt to shed light on the attitudes and opinions regarding artificial intelligence, and its place in business.
The last “State of AI” study from InsideSales.com, published in 2017, showed that over half of consumers are used to working with AI-powered applications in their home. However, less than 36 percent of consumers have used AI in the work space, showing that the technology has been slow to penetrate the business environment, mainly due to a lack of trust. The study showed there is still a lot of room for growth in the AI industry going into 2018, and companies working to increase adoption stand to gain significantly from the technology.


