Premise Data Announces Maury Blackman As New CEO

08 Feb 2018

Premise Data announced Maury Blackman as the company’s new President and CEO. Blackman will focus on scaling its business of providing leading organizations, governments, and companies access to its data and analytics platform that empowers decision makers with real-time, actionable intelligence from its global network of on-the-ground contributors. He brings over 20 years of experience leading mission driven, high growth technology companies in Silicon Valley.
David Soloff
“We have proven the incredible value of our platform—delivering unprecedented data gathering and analysis capabilities to the world’s leading organizations,” said Premise Chairman and Founder David Soloff. “The next step is to scale, and Maury is a proven leader with experience rapidly scaling technology companies. It’s fantastic news for our entire ecosystem.”
Prior to joining Premise, Blackman served as President and CEO of Accela from 2007-2016, a global government technology company. He’s currently a board member for Forensic Logic, Omnia Partners, Govlist, and is an investor and advisor for the Urban Innovation Fund. In 2016, Ernst & Young named Blackman ‘Northern California’s Entrepreneur of the Year‘ – becoming the first civic tech entrepreneur to win the award. In 2015 he was recognized by Government Technology magazine as one of its “Top 25 Doers, Dreamers, and Drivers.”
In an open letter, Blackman stated that he is “incredibly energized to be joining Premise at a time when there is so much opportunity to harness technology to do good for the world. Our data and analytics solutions are fueled by a global marketplace of on-the-ground contributors using smart-phones to capture first person observations including photos, videos, geolocation, and much more. This data is enriched and verified by industry leading data science and machine learning to produce actionable insights and visualizations.”
Premise is taking on some of the biggest issues around the globe. For example, in Colombia, Premise is providing crucial data in the fight against Zika virus and other vector-borne diseases, and in Kenya, the technology is enlisted in the global fight to eradicate HIV/AIDs. In Southeast Asia, Premise is engaged in public sentiment studies that will guide decisions for both corporations and government agencies. To date, the data company has collected more than one billion ground truth data points that have informed leading corporations, governments, and NGOs.
Blackman will also focus on expanding Premise’s capabilities by recruiting top talent to join an impressive bench of technologists, network operators, data scientists, and subject matter experts. “Our team is top notch, an incredible mix of tech and data-science all-stars combined with our domain experts. We’re going to make strategic investments across the board. Everyone at Premise shares a passion for harnessing technology for good – I feel right at home.”
Read More: There Can Be No Denying: Bots Are Now Marketers


