Globant Publishes Latest Book On How To Embrace Artificial Intelligence As A Catalyst For Augmented Intelligence

11 Jul 2018

The book works to demystify AI and provide strategies on how to implement the technology so that organizations can take full advantage of the opportunities it provides
Globant, a digitally native technology services company, today launches its latest book, “Embracing the Power of AI.” The book serves as an introduction to artificial intelligence (AI) to get readers comfortable with the principles of AI. Readers will walk away with a greater understanding of how to effectively implement AI in a way that allows them to embrace the potential that game-changing technologies provide and build an AI-capable culture in a way that augments human intelligence.
Martín Migoya
“Today we are at the forefront of one of the most radical and profound changes since we experienced the mobile and digital transformation: the Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Cognitive Revolution. This new scenario pushes companies to face profound transformations in order to stay ahead of their markets and this book intends to be a guide to dive into this new world,” says Martín Migoya, CEO of Globant. “We are facing an abundance of demand for more intelligent and human-like behavior and technology on the market, and now we have concrete ways to fill that demand.”
Co-authored by Juan José López Murphy, Javier Minhondo, Haldo Spontón, Martín Migoya  and Guibert Englebienne, “Embracing the Power of AI” leverages their expertise and experience integrating AI into digital transformation strategies through embracing a collaborative culture. The concepts addressed in “Embracing the Power of AI” are complementary to Globant’s previously published book, “The Never Ending Digital Journey,” which focused on the talent, team structure, relevant information, and methodologies required to carry out a digital transformation. Together, these books demystify, educate and equip people with a more data-driven mindset so that they can identify opportunities for AI to build disruptive and strategic solutions.
Follow Us
“There’s this misconception that an AI project is just about the technology and data,” says Juan José López Murphy, AI Studio Lead at Globant. “Tech is what makes the project physically possible, but it truly comes down to the team and skill set that is rooted in a collaborative culture. With this book, we want to help organizations determine how to go about this project development process so that they can effectively use the technology and get results. It’s essential to establish a solid foundation of a team and technical understanding for AI projects to be sustainable.”
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
In this guide, readers can expect to get an understanding of the terminology used in an AI project, such as how to differentiate AI from machine learning. Second, there are a lot of technologies that are hyped up and have a finite lifespan, readers will learn why AI is not one of those technologies and that it’s here to stay. Third, readers will be given the conceptual tools to differentiate the hyped up version of AI from the actual reality and practicality of the technology. Fourth, readers will understand how to get started on AI projects with tools that are already at their disposal so that they can then determine what they need next. Lastly, readers will be given examples of how AI is currently being used to give context to the possibilities of the technology.
Read More: How “System Mindfulness” Is Changing The FMCG Industry
“There’s a lot of flashy technology out there that organizations feel pressure to jump on just because it’s hot right now,” says Javier Minhondo, Globant’s AI Studio Partner. “It’s important to sift through the hype, take a step back, assess what business problems actually need to be addressed, then thoroughly research what technologies can be applied to address them and create a better customer experience. Our book will help organizations ensure they are doing this by providing the background, strategies, and practical applications of AI so that they can make informed decisions moving forward.”
 


