Robots Sophia And Pepper Will Headline Kadima.Ventures Innovation Fair 2018

01 Feb 2018

Arizona-based Blockchain Technology Leader Integrates Top AI, Cryptocurrency and Robot Intelligence In to Its Inaugural Event on January 30 in Scottsdale
Kadima.Ventures, a transformative collaboration of companies that offers resources to early-stage startups and legacy companies to evolve ideas into advanced technologies, announced today that Sophia, Hanson Robotics’ humanoid robot, and Pepper of SoftBank Robotics will play key roles in the Kadima.Ventures Innovation Fair 2018 at WestWorld in Scottsdale. These are among the latest enhancements to the fully-loaded lineup of participants at Kadima’s inaugural Innovation Fair, which is bringing together elite technologists, investors, startups, major corporate sponsors, incubators, economic development organizations, and civic groups from around the world to build innovation synergy and engage in a totally new way.
Kadima’s extensive expertise in blockchain will drive the Innovation Fair to showcase the myriad of current and future applications of the technology, with Sophia and Pepper as prime physical examples of its potential. To further the progress of innovation via blockchain, Hanson Robotics is developing SingularityNET, a cloud-based open market for Artificial Intelligence (AI) that leverages cryptocurrency-based smart contracts – this will streamline transactions that serve and develop other software programs in need of AI.
Colin Cantrell
In keeping with Kadima’s mission, the event has attracted global attention, and will feature top technology and cryptocurrency visionaries like Colin Cantrell, the creator of Nexus, a scalable and highly secure cube satellite network that builds upon the blockchain protocol, creating a fully de-centralized internet and an alternative to centralized financial institutions.  Cantrell will be speaking on the future of blockchain, quantum security, and much more.
During the Innovation Fair, a live interactive simulation between investors and startups will be held. Kadima CEO and co-founder Tim Wales commented, “we’re extremely proud and excited to see this level of support to Kadima’s mission by such global luminaries in the technology space.  Blockchain is revolutionizing digital technologies around the world, and we’ve only just scratched the surface on the impact this foundational innovation will have on our economic and social infrastructure,” said Wales.  “There’s no better validation of the tireless work we’ve invested over the past three years in developing our blockchain technology solutions than our inaugural event attracting the elite talent in the industry.”
Additional Innovation Fair headliners include keynote speaker, global business celebrity, and primetime television and podcast show host Jeffrey Hayzlett, Sean Higgins, CTO and Transformation Specialist of the Herjavec Group, and Dr. Rachel MK Headley, professional keynote speaker, Mensa PhD scientist, and certified Project Management Professional.
Kadima.Ventures is a highly developed collaboration of companies that offers resources to early stage startups, and also supports legacy companies by enabling them to transform ideas and concepts into advanced technologies, products, and services.  Kadima means ‘Forward’ – as forward-thinking industry leaders, we leverage the latest technology advances to deliver exponential growth and exits for our partners, i.e., leveraging one of our blockchain technologies to facilitate and streamline funding options.  Our proven model provides a sustained support system for our clients: Kadima.Technology: an advanced R&D lab for product development and release of new technologies; Kadima.Consulting: which enables access to specialized project resources by tapping into Kadima’s expansive partner network; Kadima.Marketing: a comprehensive design, marketing, and advertising agency; Kadima.Services: a full service software development and hosting firm.
Read More: How A 100-Year-Old Unbreakable Cipher Will Transform Digital Security


