Inventor Of The World Wide Web, Sir Tim Berners-Lee, Will Be Keynote Speaker At MuleSoft CONNECT 2018

09 May 2018

MuleSoft’s Annual Conference, Brings Together CIOs, IT Leaders And Developers To Discuss How To Accelerate Digital Transformation With Application Networks
Salesforce, the global leader in CRM, today announced that Salesforce Chairman and CEO Marc Benioff will speak at MuleSoft CONNECT 2018, on May 9, 2018. Benioff will participate in a fireside chat with Greg Schott, CEO of MuleSoft, a Salesforce company. The conversation will start at approximately 10:25 a.m.
MuleSoft CONNECT 2018 is a conference for developers and engineers, architects, and technical decision makers. Attendees will learn to design, build and manage integrations and APIs like experts, get answers that solve real-world problems, and strategize on how to achieve IT and business goals.
MuleSoft provides the most widely used integration platform (Mule ESB & CloudHub) for connecting SaaS & enterprise applications in the cloud and on-premise.
But the main attraction – the keynote speaker Sir Tim Berners-Lee – is what everyone’s talking about. The inventor of the World Wide Web and one of Time Magazine’s ‘100 Most Important People of the 20th Century’, Sir Tim Berners-Lee is a scientist and academic whose visionary and innovative work has transformed almost every aspect of our lives.
Sir Tim Berners-Lee
Having invented the Web in 1989 while working at CERN and subsequently working to ensure it was made freely available to all, Berners-Lee is now dedicated to enhancing and protecting the web’s future. He is a Founding Director of the World Wide Web Foundation, which seeks to ensure the web serves humanity by establishing it as a global public good and a basic right. He is also Director of the World Wide Web Consortium, a global web standards organisation he founded in 1994 to lead the web to its full potential. In 2012 he co-founded the Open Data Institute (ODI) which advocates for Open Data in the UK and globally. Sir Tim has advised a number of governments and corporations on ongoing digital strategies. A graduate of Oxford University, Sir Tim presently holds academic posts at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology at CSAIL (Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab), (USA) and the University of Oxford (UK).
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World


