Cryptonoob: Startup Makes Bitcoin And Altcoin Purchasing Seamless And Secure

09 Apr 2018

They Describe Themselves As A Bunch Of Passionate Nerds With A Mission To Help Clear The Air Around Cryptocurrency And Make It A Larger Community Than It Already Is
As people continue to explore the world of bitcoins and an assortment of cryptocurrencies, the challenges may seem to steadily rise. To meet these growing challenges Cryptonoob launched its new website providing informational content and a helpful guide to purchasing bitcoins and altcoins for beginners and seasoned traders alike.
Steering users with a step-by-step guide, Cryptonoob offers a dedicated platform for transferring cryptocurrency to trusted wallets. Since the main concern for the crypto community is security, the primary focus rests on securing bitcoins and altcoins in protected wallets. Cryptonoob stresses on the importance of having dedicated wallets in order to prevent loss of coins which is usually resultant of sudden shutting down of exchanges. With detailed research, the website lays out a comprehensive method from downloading a trusted wallet and then transferring the coins securely from the cryptocurrency exchange to said wallet.
Rishab Jain
“The idea was born from a passion for blockchain and decentralized systems,” says co-founder Rishab Jain. “The distributed ledger technology is revolutionary to say the least, so we aimed for a one-stop informational platform that even beginners can join without apprehension. The goal is to encourage the cryptocurrency community and with Cryptonoob, users are able to readily acquire information and actively grow with the community.”
As a centre for information, Cryptonoob focuses solely on providing a place of insight for newcomers to bitcoin and altcoins. The cautionary disclaimer entails that this guide should neither be claimed or referred as an investment guide or counsel, nor as a ‘recommendation’ regarding any course of action. Like with any monetary exchange, the individual is advised to take risk factors into account and invest responsibly.
Cryptonoob stands as a one-stop information portal that allows buying and transferring of coins from one wallet to another with the Changelly platform integrated right into Cryptonoob’s website itself. In an attempt to ease the process and remove complexity behind purchasing of cryptocurrencies, Cryptonoob has an option of purchasing bitcoins directly from their website with a credit card or purchasing from listed cryptocurrency exchanges. A concise list of exchanges is made accessible on their website along with the market value of the trading of each coin. Trusted exchanges include Coinbase, Coinone, Bittrex, Kraken, Bitfinex, Etherdelta, Binance and many more for creating digital wallets.
“We’re excited for all the possibilities that digital currency of the future enables” beams co-founder Dr. Arshia Siddique. “The goal was to create a platform that simplifies the purchasing process and breaks down barriers, especially for newcomers in the realm of cryptocurrency.”


