Lymbyc Solutions Creates World’s First Virtual Analyst

09 Mar 2018

Quick And Cost-Effective, Lymbyc Mimics The Capabilities Of A Human Analyst While Delivering The Benefits Of Rapid Scalability At Fractional Cost
In a bid to empower the business leader with the decision-making process and also democratize data science, Lymbyc Solutions Pvt. Ltd. launches ‘Lymbyc’- world’s first virtual data scientist. It takes inspiration from the limbic brain that helps guide humans on ‘why’ we do things.
Lymbyc is a self-service, predictive, insights platform that is driven by an adaptive machine learning engine. It helps improve decision-making in organizations by curating embedded intelligence across all data sources, while tackling enormous amounts of data, organizational silos and information complexity. Data science is a growing market and Lymbyc is all set to grab its market share. According to Statistics MRC, the global data science platform market was accounted for $19.75 billion in 2016 and is expected to reach $128.21 billion by 2022 growing at a CAGR of 36.5% during the forecast period.
Satyakam Mohanty
Speaking at the launch Mr. Satyakam Mohanty, Founder, Lymbyc Solutions, said, “Big Data Analytics have often been used as a validation resource and existing solutions help organizations answer the ‘what’ and ‘how’ kind of business queries at best, but cannot help them understand the ‘why’. We wanted to create a solution that truly mimics analysts and data scientists and does not stop at being just an intuitive BI system. Lymbyc enables organizations to undertake data discovery and predictive insight generation through a proprietary NLP-based querying language that harnesses Artificial Intelligence, thus helping them to take strategic decisions in real-time across enterprise and consumer spaces. It automatically learns what is relevant for your business with every interaction and continually curates information for future sharing.”
Lymbyc is a cost-effective solution that can be deployed fast, has the capacity exceeding entire teams of data scientists to help companies deal with complex and time consuming business queries in real-time. It is especially designed for business leaders – to make insights available to them at the point of decision making.
Previously known as Ma Foi Analytics, Lymbyc Solutions Pvt. Ltd. was founded in 2012 to build robust analytical products that melded advanced technology to strong data science foundations to help organizations deal with these core fundamental problems. With a vision to empower the business leader at the point of decision making and to elevate analytics from just being a validation resource to an intervention mechanism with foresight, Lymbyc was conceptualized. Headquartered in Bangalore, Lymbyc Solutions Pvt. Ltd. is a leading edge innovator in advanced analytics solutions serving varied clients across India, the US, Singapore and in the Middle East.
Founded by Satyakam Mohanty, the organization has come a long way from providing traditional consulting services to building world class solutions rooted in AI and Big Data.


