FaceCake Releases First In-Store Augmented Reality Shopping Platform For Jewelry

23 Jan 2018

Dangle Earring App Lets Shoppers Find, Try and Buy Their Statement Style
FaceCake Marketing Technologies, Inc. is previewing its new Augmented Reality shopping platform for jewelry in New York at NRF 2018 in HP’s booth #2545. Available as a mobile app or for partner brands on their websites or in-store, Dangle is the first Augmented Reality application for earrings, allowing users to instantly view statement earrings on their own live reflection in real time. Dangle lets consumers virtually Try-On earrings on a selfie or a live video feed with added physics that show true-to-life realism and the relative size of each pair, common challenges when shopping for earrings. Dangle also provides recommendations using FaceCake’s proprietary Recommendation Engine which employs its Artificial Intelligence (AI) based system to select earring styles based on user attributes like face shape, skin tone, hair color, etc. Other features include social sharing, new product offerings in a curated Jewelry Box, and built-in purchasing.
“For Augmented Reality shopping and virtual Try-On, realism is key in our intuitive, easy-to-use platform,” says FaceCake Founder and CEO Linda Smith. “With our latest application, Dangle, we solve the biggest shopping challenges for earrings – actual size and how shape and color fit your personal style.”
Dangle features:
Ability to virtually Try-On jewelry in an Augmented Reality environment
Interact with products on a live video feed or selfie
Lifelike movement and relative sizing for accurate shopping experience
Receive personalized recommendations
Discover new products with Dangle’s curated Jewelry Box
Share with friends or buy favorites with built-in purchase option
Omni-channel availability
FaceCake Marketing Technologies, Inc., creator of Swivel, Swivel Close-Up, CAKE AR, ShadeScout, GlamScout, and more, is a leader in augmented retail with a personalized targeted marketing platform. Combining patented technologies with intuitive user interfaces, FaceCake’s innovations in Try-On allow consumers to virtually try products on their own images in real time, while instantly providing relevant product recommendations for superior personalization. With billions of product Try-Ons, FaceCake is expert at eliminating traditional shopping barriers. FaceCake’s shopping platform is cross-device compatible, making it accessible from anywhere. The privately held company is based in Calabasas, CA.


