Renowned Blockchain Expert Dr. Vincent Gramoli Joins Bloxian Technology As Senior Strategic Advisor

05 Feb 2018

Dr. Vincent Gramoli, world-renowned blockchain expert, joins the Advisory Board with Australian Blockchain start-up, Bloxian Technology.
Bloxian Technology, a Sydney based blockchain startup focused on connecting enterprises to Blockchain is pleased to announce that Dr. Vincent Gramoli, Australian researcher and world-renowned blockchain expert who gained his international reputation through his previous experiences at INRIA, France, Cornell, U.S., and EPFL, Switzerland has joined the team as a Senior Strategic Advisor.
Vincent has been instrumental in the development of the Red belly blockchain. Red belly is an unforkable blockchain which was tested and proved as the fastest blockchain in the world when it processed more than 660,000 transactions per second running on 300 machines in a single data centre; outperforming all existing payment platforms. Vincent brings deep knowledge of blockchain to his new role at Bloxian Technology, where he will provide expert advice and direction on technical strategy and will assist in the strategic direction and growth.
Kunal Chhabra
“We are honoured to have Dr. Vincent Gramoli join our board of advisors. His extensive knowledge and expertise in the industry will bring a lot of energies and drive towards our goal,” says Kunal Chhabra, Vice President of Innovation & Strategy at Bloxian Technology.
Vincent Gramoli
“Our advisory board is the right mix of business, expertise, and academia. This culture allows us to bring different ideas, concepts and new ways of doing business and most importantly being self-critical. Together with Dr. Gramoli and the rest of the advisory team, I look forward seeing Bloxian Technology achieve new heights,” added Kunal Chhabra.
“Bloxian Technology offers an exciting space in Blockchain and its application at industry level which is essential for enterprises looking to bridge the gap between Blockchain and Business models,” says Dr. Vincent Gramoli.


