SkyWatch.AI Launches Industry-First Drone Safety And Insurance Platform To Enable Safer Pilots To Pay Less

04 May 2018

SkyWatch.AI offers on-demand drone insurance using an AI-based safety platform, allowing safe pilots to pay less on their insurance premiums
SkyWatch.AI, the world’s first usage-based safety and insurance platform for the drone industry, announced today the launch of an industry-first drone safety and on-demand insurance app. Now available on the App Store and Google Play for both business and recreational operators, the SkyWatch application relies on a variety of data sources — from drone sensors and weather mapping to 3D airspace mapping and crowd density — and Artificial Intelligence algorithms to predict and prevent potential failures before they ever occur.
The SkyWatch application relies on a variety of data sources — from drone sensors and weather mapping to 3D airspace mapping and crowd density — and Artificial Intelligence algorithms to predict and prevent potential failures before they ever occur.
The SkyWatch app supports purchasing insurance for all types of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), or drones, under 55 pounds. In DJI drones, for Android devices and very soon on iOS, operators can also get real-time hazard warnings based off of the drone’s telemetry, calculating a proprietary “safety score” for each flight, based on the operator’s behavior. The “safety score” can be used to set an industry benchmark for operators, who will be more aware of how they fly, and will be able to improve their score as they practice better, safer flights. Additionally, operators will be able to purchase insurance based on this safety score.
Tomer Kashi
“Drone operators need a solution that caters to their needs,” said Tomer Kashi, SkyWatch’s CEO. “Our platform doesn’t only offer insurance, or safety — but marks a new era in drone insurance, where safer pilots can be rewarded for their efforts to fly safe, and actually pay less on their insurance premiums.”
One of SkyWatch’s unique features is the ability to plan flight areas more accurately by drawing a polygon, thus empowering operators to avoid hazards in a flight area and only pay for insurance coverage that they actually need.


