Introducing Dragonereum — The Next Big Thing In Cryptogaming

04 May 2018

Their Blockchain Breeding Algorithm Features A Genetic Penalty For Breeding With Relatives, And “Positive Mutations” Release Mystery Genes
With all the features users have been longing for, plus cutting-edge blockchain gameplay, Dragonereum has what it takes to be the leading cryptogame of 2018. Meet the dragons who are going to rock the blockchain.
”Most games do not have any game mechanics or a properly crafted game ecosystem. Dragonereum offers the community the ability to fight and engage dragons inside the app and meet other dragon owners”, says the games’ co-founder Nikolai Pashuk.
Cryptocollectible blockchain dragons – As a prelude to gameplay, players must acquire a dragon egg, which is a ERC721 token. Once your dragon is hatched, the game starts.
Decentralized breeding algorithm – All future generations of dragons will be created from gen0 dragons. Our breeding algorithm is a smart contract; it’s verifiable by anyone and results are immutable. Rest assured, no one can alter the outcome of your breeding. We restricted the dragon population by allowing only one breeding per level, with the option to breed or update your dragon skills.
Each dragon consists of 10 parts. For gen0 dragons, each part is defined by our random number generator, and selected from the available gen0 dragon parts. At launch, Dragonereum offers 35 body-part variations. This gives us 2 758 547 353 515 625 unique dragons! Inbreeding and mystery body parts will bring to users 97 656 250 000 000 000 possible dragons, just during launch! This is 12 800 000 for each person on the Earth!
Best blockchain genetics in the world – Our blockchain breeding algorithm features a genetic penalty for breeding with relatives, and “positive mutations” release mystery genes.
Skills and Level Ups – Each dragon has 5 basic skills which determine its abilities. During fights, and for every victory, a dragon is rewarded with Experience Points (XP). After reaching the XP threshold, a dragon automatically earns Action Points (AP), which can be spent on breeding or updating body-parts for an extra skills boost.
Blockchain battles – In Dragonereum, battling is the only way a dragon can earn XP, level ups, skills upgrades or breeding rights. Fights are also computed and stored on the blockchain.
In-game currency – Gold is our ERC20 token, the in-game currency which is used to buy egg hatchings and extra skills. Players can earn Gold by fighting other dragons.
“Our mission is to create a cryptocollectible game that rewards players interacting with the ecosystem the most. We will accomplish this by balancing incentives inside the game and creating in-game events to keep user engagement levels high”, says Vladimir Skarmakhovich.
The game is fully developed and in the final stages of testing. We host a lively conversation in our communities in Telegram and Discord channels.
Expect a gen0 Egg distribution announcement from mid-May onwards.
You can find articles explaining the game and its features at our Medium channel, whitepaper, website and social media channels.
Get ready for the coolest crypto game of 2018; the dragons are coming!
Read More: Interview With Roy Pereira, CEO, Zoom.Ai


