BECS Bitcoin + Ethereum Crypto Summit Holds First Event In Dallas, Saturday, May 12, 2018

03 May 2018

The crypto journey starts here for 200 attendees at this new one-day cryptocurrency event in Richardson, Texas, with over 20 speakers and exhibitors, and two session tracks. Discounted Passes available now.
WorkHacker, LLC is proud to announce a new cryptocurrency learning event for beginning and intermediate crypto and blockchain enthusiasts. The sessions range from the basics, such as wallets, Bitcoin Teller Machines, how to get started trading Bitcoin, Ethereum, and alternative coins, to other topics like User Experience, Future State of Decentralized Applications, and Crypto in Latin America. The title sponsor is Crypto Unicorn Money.
Rob Garner
The summit is designed to educate and expose attendees to a wide range of core crypto topics, and impart as much info as possible in a short timeframe. Rob Garner, show chair, says “BECS is designed to offer a national crypto conference experience, at an easy-to-access venue, at an affordable price. We know that not everyone has the time and money to fly to a national conference 1,000 miles away, and we feel strongly that everyone should have the opportunity to participate in the crypto and blockchain revolution. We created a summit that anyone would be comfortable attending, as well as intermediate and experienced professionals.”
Garner adds, “this casual and friendly conference will provide a quick and easy immersion for all, and with a high speaker-to-attendee ratio we expect attendees to get their basic questions answered, and also be left with many new concepts to consider for months and years to come.”
The event venue is Noah’s Event Center in Richardson, Texas, just 30 minutes from either Dallas Love Field, or DFW Airport, the venue features free parking, and food trucks will be on location for lunch. There are a number of great hotels in the area, with many attendees staying at the Renaissance in Richardson, and the new Hampton Inn, next door to Noah’s Event Center.
 


