AdaptiveMobile Confirms Multiple Customers For SIGIL Beta-programme

27 Feb 2018

New Customers Operating Across 2 Continents Receive Benefit Of World’s First Signalling Intelligence Layer To Predict And Protect Against Attacks On Mobile Networks
AdaptiveMobile Security, the world leader in mobile network security, today announced that it has confirmed multiple customers for its SIGIL beta-programme. SIGIL is the world’s first global signalling intelligence and analytics cloud service, enabling mobile operators to maximise the effectiveness of existing defences against signalling attacks from malicious actors. The Company’s proprietary AI cloud offering was launched in late 2017 and has secured three customers since launching.
SIGIL is a security service that can be layered on top of any SS7 firewall to benefit from community-based intelligence led by AdaptiveMobile to best protect subscribers. Through the application of advanced machine-learning algorithms on suspicious signalling data, mobile operators can proactively predict and defend against evolving attacks.
Brian Collins
“Operators worldwide are deploying signalling firewalls and the industry is working strongly together to protect against signalling threats,” said Brian Collins, Chief Executive Officer of AdaptiveMobile Security. Collins continued: “However, the increasing need for comprehensive network security drives a requirement for next-generation intelligence and threat interpretation – operator networks require more than simple STP-based defences to protect their subscribers. The unique intelligence of SIGIL is best placed to proactively detect, interpret and protect against evolving signalling threats and we are proud to partner with customers across multiple continents to protect the world’s critical communication infrastructure. Collaboration is the only way such threats can be defeated.”
SIGIL proprietary algorithms were built on the pioneering signalling research conducted by AdaptiveMobile’s world-leading Threat Intelligence Unit, the results of which have revealed increasing levels of sophistication in attacks across signalling networks, proving that attackers are adapting to defences and continuing to compromise global signalling infrastructure. By understanding the threat landscape, operators are able to proactively predict attacks, effectively categorising threat vectors and defending against them to protect their networks and their subscribers.
AdaptiveMobile Security is the world leader in mobile network security, protecting over 1.7 billion subscribers worldwide, and the only mobile security company offering products designed to protect all services on both fixed and mobile networks through in-network and cloud solutions. With deep expertise and a unique focus on network-to-handset security, AdaptiveMobile’s award-winning security solutions provide its customers with advanced threat detection and actionable intelligence, combined with the most comprehensive security products on the market today.
AdaptiveMobile was founded in 2004 and boasts some of the world’s largest mobile operators as customers and the leading security and telecom equipment vendors as partners. The Company is headquartered in Dublin with offices in North America, Europe, South Africa, the Middle East and Asia Pacific.


