First.io Closes $5M Series A To Expand Artificial Intelligence Platform For Real Estate Professionals

25 May 2018

MATH Venture Partners, Nine Four Ventures and @properties’ co-founders Thad Wong and Mike Golden double down on relationships and lead Series A investment round
Chicago-based startup investors, MATH Venture Partners, Nine Four Ventures, and @properties’ co-founders Thad Wong and Mike Golden, led a $5 million Series A investment round in First.io, a technology startup that uses artificial intelligence to help real estate agents connect with prospective home sellers ahead of their competition.
First empowers brokers and agents to focus on the right people in their network at the right time.  It starts by saving their time in managing their network – an often cumbersome and dreaded task for agents.  First organizes an agent’s contacts, and supplements missing personal and property data to help keep databases current.  First also leverages hundreds of data points, such as income and spending behavior, market trends, property information, and life events on 214 million people across the nation.  First’s machine learning platform analyzes this information to provide unique insights that help agents prioritize and facilitate communication with contacts that will lead to revenue. First also understands the value of human touch, and now empowers agents with a personal assistant to schedule in person meetings.  With First, busy agents spend more of their time meeting with the right people, deepening relationships and, ultimately, providing value to more clients.
Read More: Interview With Bryson Hill, CEO — Daplie
“First helps agents identify the relationships they should be nurturing, and puts them in the right place at the right time to unlock the latent value of an agent’s network,” said Mike Schneider, founder and CEO of First. “This latest round of funding not only brings us partners with a wealth of expertise and additional, powerful distribution channels. It will also accelerate our development of new innovative products to help top agents leverage industry-leading intelligence to grow their businesses faster than ever.”
The customer-acquisition piece will be super-charged by both @properties and Elowe’s Laramar Group. Laramar, which specializes in multifamily properties, urban high-rise development and office properties, has a presence in over 20 markets from coast to coast. @properties is ranked by REALTrends as the 11th largest brokerage firm in the United States, and has 2,500 licensed brokers in the greater Chicago area.
Read More: Trescon’s World Blockchain Summit To Touchdown In Frankfurt
“First meets three important criteria for our portfolio companies,” said Troy Henikoff, managing director of MATH Venture Partners. “They have a superior management team; they have validated technology that creates major efficiencies in an area where little innovation has occurred; and they have a significant advantage in customer acquisition.”
“We love the technology, and we’re excited about the success that brokers around the country are having with First, said Thad Wong, co-founder of @properties. “We can provide a platform to accelerate First’s growth not only within @properties but throughout the brokerage industry. Our business was built on relationships so this is well aligned with our mission.”
MATH Venture Partners, established by Mark Achler and Troy Henikoff, has a wide-ranging portfolio that includes parking app SpotHero and mortgage workflow app Maxwell. Nine Four Ventures was recently launched by Jeff Elowe, president and CEO of Laramar Group, a multi-billion-dollar real estate investment and management firm. Wong and Golden, who own @properties, one of the nation’s largest independent brokerage firms, also have backed technology startups including Konverse, MortgageHippo, and the real estate tax appeal platform TurboAppeal.
Read More: GameFace Labs Opens Pre-Orders For Android-Based VR Headset Powered By NVIDIA Jetson TX2
“First pushes the edge of what can be done with big data in real estate, and we see potential in other verticals as well. We will leverage our significant industry and investor network to help expand First’s customer base in a far more efficient manner than most traditional venture investors,” noted Elowe.


