Anodot Wins Best Use Of AI For Game Development In The 2018 AI Breakthrough Awards

27 Jun 2018

The AI Breakthrough Awards are run by Tech Breakthrough Awards Organization, A Successful Award And Recognition Platform For Leading Technology Companies On A Global Scale
Anodot, the autonomous analytics company, has won Best Use of AI for Game Development in the 2018 AI Breakthrough Awards. The awards honor excellence and recognize the creativity, hard work and success of companies, technologies and products in the field of Artificial Intelligence. With thousands of nominations from all over the world, the competition was fierce, but Anodot’s success and advanced AI software allowed the company to stand out in a heavily populated category.
Anodot has been selected in connection with the work it did with Outfit7 Limited, one of the world’s fastest-growing multinational family entertainment companies. Outfit7 enhanced its world-class user experience with the Anodot system, which allowed the company to monitor data even more closely, and to more rapidly identify potential app performance pitfalls before they impacted any of its 350 million monthly active users.
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
David Drai
“We are extremely honored to be recognized for our capabilities in game development as well as be considered alongside other leaders in artificial intelligence,” said David Drai, CEO and Co-Founder of Anodot.
David added, “As Anodot grows globally, we continue to enable Outfit7 and other gaming giants to continuously track business and technical data while receiving real-time alerts of incidents. We are excited to be among the selected solutions in AI, not only for gaming but for incidents companies across industries face.”
The AI Breakthrough Awards are run by Tech Breakthrough Awards organization, a successful award and recognition platform for leading technology companies on a global scale. Tech Breakthrough has worked with companies that include Cisco, Dell, Philips, Sprint, HP, Comcast, Western Union, Intel, Quicken and dozens more to drive business results.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc


