Liulishuo Selected To CB Insights AI 100, As The Only Chinese Education Company

29 Dec 2017

At the A-ha! conference held in San Francisco on December 12, renowned big data research institution CB Insights unveiled the annual AI 100 – a list of 100 of the most promising private companies applying artificial intelligence technology across 25+ industries, including healthcare, fintech, robotics, education, cybersecurity, etc. Standing out from the pool of 2,000+ companies, Liulishuo (formerly known asLingoChamp) was selected to this prestigious list, for its groundbreaking achievements in the field of “AI+Education”. It is also the only Chinese education company on the list.
CB insights AI 100
CB Insights is an authority on reporting industry trends and emerging companies in artificial intelligence. The company uses machine learning, algorithms and data visualization to explore massive amounts of data of the companies, from social media to patent documents. Its data has been cited 1,500+ times by premiere media outlets, including The New York Times, Bloomberg, The Financial Times, Fortune, TechCrunch and more.
The CB Insights research team selected the AI 100 winners based on a combination of data submitted by the companies, responses to interview questions and the company’s Mosaic Score. Mosaic is an algorithm built with funding from the National Science Foundation that gives predictive intelligence into the health of private companies.
Anand Sanwal
“This year’s list was culled from 1,000+ applications and looks even more impressive. These are companies using artificial intelligence in industries from drug discovery and cybersecurity to robotics and legal tech. I’m happy that CB Insights is able to shine a light on the founders and companies that will revolutionize these industries and look forward to seeing what they do in 2018 and beyond,” said CB Insights CEO Anand Sanwal.
Given more than 2,000 companies were nominated or applied and less than 5% were selected, the competition tended to be quite intense. Only 7 Chinese companies were on the list, and Liulishuo is the only education company among them.
Dr. Yi Wang
“We are honored to be part of this elite group of emerging ‘AI+’ technology companies. This award from CB Insights demonstrates the growing recognition of Liulishuo on a global scale,” said Dr. Yi Wang, the founder and CEO of Liulishuo. “With the mission of helping everyone become a global citizen, Liulishuo will keep on with the exploration of ‘AI+Education’, and bring high-quality education resources to more parts of China.”


