BluVector Extends File-based And Fileless Malware Detection To Cloud-based Email Services

13 Mar 2018

Advanced intrusion detection introduced for Office 365 and Google for Busines
BluVector introduced its latest additions to BluVector® Cortex™, including support for Office 365 and Google Mail, designed to help mid- to large-sized organizations detect file-based and fileless malware attacks through their cloud-based email services.
BluVector Cortex helps orgs detect file-based & fileless malware attacks through their cloud-based email services.
In a recent interview on the state of the cloud office, experts cite that while the cloud email adoption rate is rising, it is constrained by concerns about security and privacy. Those who fail to move to the cloud will be negatively impacted by the increased cost and lack of access to the innovative technologies, which can help to advance the business.
With BluVector Cortex 3.1, organizations can fast track adoption of cloud office capabilities with significantly reduced risk associated with phishing, spearphishing, ransomware and credential-phishing attacks. Organizations can use the power of artificial intelligence, machine learning and speculative execution to sense and respond to threats in real time.
The following are new features and benefits of the latest version of BluVector Cortex:
Cloud Email Analysis – BluVector Cortex can analyze malware attacks from any cloud-based IMAP email service, including Office 365, Google for Business and other major providers.
New Event Reporting Dashboard – Automatically translate the rich network traffic data generated by BluVector Cortex into easily understandable insights.
Dynamic Malware Analysis in the Cloud – Users will be able to automate secondary analysis of flagged malware content. By providing additional context associated with the inner workings of the captured malware, analysts can now gain a deeper understanding of the threat.
Detection of Malicious VBScripts – BluVector Cortex now examines all files to look for and analyze embedded VBScript, an increasingly common attack vector. The detection capability comes as a new classifier of the patented Machine Learning Engine (MLE) of BluVector Cortex.
Built-In Threat Intelligence – An improved intelligence feed provides context around suspicious events and helps identify lateral movements post breach.
Travis Rosiek
“While email continues to be the primary method of communication for organizations, it also continues to be the weakest link in security. As such, threat actors commonly target their attacks on email and are getting better at deceiving users,” said Travis Rosiek, CTO, BluVector. “As our customers continue to shift to hybrid IT and email environments, we can give them the confidence they need to address the complex threat landscape on any platform.”


