Ensono Officially Closes $405M Acquisition Of Wipro’s Hosted Data Center Services Business

03 Jul 2018

Ensono doubles in size and scale to accelerate innovation with clients
Ensono™, a leading hybrid IT services provider, closed on its acquisition of Wipro Limited’s Hosted Data Center Services (DCS) business in U.S., Europe and Singapore. The acquisition of the Indian assets is planned to be completed later in the year. Ensono and its clients will greatly benefit from the more than 900 associates joining the Ensono family.
This is Ensono’s third acquisition in less than three years. By adding Wipro’s Hosted Data Center business, Ensono has nearly doubled in size, expanded its client portfolio, and increased its annual revenue to more than $550 million. Ensono will expand its presence in the U.S. and U.K., establish an operational presence in India, and extend into Germany to provide clients with always on, scalable service.
Follow Us
Ensono and Wipro have entered into a long-term partnership agreement to jointly address the hybrid IT requirements of Wipro’s new and existing enterprise clients.  As part of the agreement, Wipro will make a strategic investment of $55 million in Ensono and join the company’s Board of Directors.
Raj Bagga
“We’re proud to enter into a partnership with a company who has years of IT experience that’s able to fully meet the needs of international hosted data center clients,” said Raj Bagga, vice president of global infrastructure services at Wipro Limited. “Our combined company will bring solutions to clients across industries more quickly and at a larger scale than ever before.”
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
“This acquisition is a strategic move to expand our global presence to offer clients more options and access to a larger group of talented associates that will help drive faster transformation and innovation for our clients,” said Jeff VonDeylen, CEO of Ensono.  “Ensono’s growth over the last three years has been astounding, and this acquisition solidifies our position as a relentless ally to our clients and cements our position as a recognized global leader in hybrid IT.”
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections


