Advantexe Launches New Artificial Intelligent (AI) Training Platform

03 Apr 2018

Advantexe has launched a new artificial intelligence (AI) corporate training platform called SimBot™. SimBots are designed to simulate a two-way business dialogue between a learner and an online AI bot to drive skill development through real-time practice.
Advantexe, a global leader in business simulation-centric talent development solutions, today announced the debut of a new artificial intelligence (AI) corporate training platform called SimBot™ to help build skills, drive application of newly learned concepts, and improve the effectiveness of learning.
Advantexe SimBots are interactive machine learning tools designed to simulate a two-way dialogue between a learner and an online AI bot. Learners receive a short description of a situation, and with a push of a button, quickly engage in a simulated conversation. During the course of the dialogue, the SimBot captures data and reviews patterns, which allows them to adjust and react to the learner, just as if they were having a real face-to-face discussion.
Each SimBot exercise typically runs about three minutes in length and is structured around a set of skills or competencies, such as resolving a price objection, providing feedback, or even positioning a value message. At the conclusion of each exercise, learners receive extensive feedback that identifies achievements or gaps for each competency. In addition, analytic data is captured in a manager administration site to provide managers with individual and cohort data for further coaching and areas for improvement.
Robert Brodo
“Artificial Intelligence (AI) is quickly proving its role as a game changing tool in many industries, including the talent development sector,” says Robert Brodo, Advantexe’s CEO. “We view AI tools as a natural extension to all of our business simulations and learning journeys. Our SimBot products and platform provides learners with an on-demand and real-time tool that allows them to further practice and hone in on skills in a risk-free, yet extremely realistic environment.”
Advantexe’s SimBots and AI platform are developed in partnership with Giant Otter. Giant Otter is a leading AI development company building a future where machines can participate in extended, coherent, context-rich conversations with people. Building on 8 years of AI research at MIT, as well as concepts refined developing award-winning AI in the video game industry, Giant Otter’s hybrid approach leverages human trainers, both to minimize deployment time, and to provide feedback enabling fluid transitions to automated interactions. The company is based in the Boston area and is supported by leading early stage investors, including the National Science Foundation.


