NT Concepts Partners With Veritone To Deliver Powerful AI Tech To Federal Customers

03 Apr 2018

National Security solution innovator teams with leading artificial intelligence company to revolutionize advanced analytics in Government
NT Concepts, a leading provider of National Security solutions, has partnered with artificial intelligence (AI) and cognitive solutions pioneer Veritone®. The strategic alliance enables NT Concepts to deliver the Veritone aiWARE™ platform to federal customers and leverage next-generation commercial AI technology for highly accurate, timely intelligence at scale.
Veritone aiWARE™ outperforms single-point AI solutions in agency use today by intelligently routing content through a continuously-expanding environment of cognitive engines. In the area of natural language processing, the platform automatically predicts the accuracy of each engine output and selects the best engine, or group of engines, to process the entire file, or segment of the file, and applies multiple engines as needed.
Darin Powers
The orchestration of hundreds of hyper-trained, learning AI engines iteratively optimizes data accuracy and performance while reducing cost and processing time. Additionally, the “plug and play” nature of the open platform allows for easy integration of new AI technologies into both the engine and application ecosystem, as well as the current analyst workflows, effectively future-proofing agency investments.
“Our partnership with Veritone extends our continued commitment to deliver next-tier thinking and proven commercial technology to Government. We’re using Veritone AI to go beyond simple automation to bringing our customers incredibly powerful orchestrated AI ecosystems that generate precision-point data they can trust,” said Darin Powers, President and COO of NT Concepts. “NT Concepts and Veritone will continue to expand the use of AI across enterprise portfolios to enable forward-looking decisions and confidently address critical defense concerns.”
Ryan Steelberg
“We are pleased to team with NT Concepts as they help deliver Veritone aiWARE™ to federal agencies. By employing our fully-integrated best-of-breed cognitive engines and potent applications, Government will make significant progress toward removing content silos, accelerating mission requirements, and identifying new opportunities to serve and safeguard citizens,” said Ryan Steelberg, President of Veritone.
The application of the Veritone technology to generate solid intelligence within the National Security community is game-changing. Analysts can quickly and accurately analyze massive volumes of data and identify specific faces, license plates, words, locations, and more – within minutes instead of hours. aiWARE™ is hosted in virtually any environment.
 


