MapD Technologies Expands Go-To-Market Leadership Team As Momentum Builds

30 Aug 2017

VPs Justin Sears, Ashish Sahu and Ashish Bambroo join from Hortonworks, Cask Data and MuleSoft to Capitalize on Potential of GPU-Powered Analytics
MapD Technologies today announced the expansion of its leadership team to seize the market potential of GPU-powered analytics. Justin Sears joins MapD as VP of Product Marketing, Ashish Sahu becomes VP of Product Management, and Ashish Bambroo takes up the position of VP of Business Development. The hires come as MapD gains traction having recently signed deals with Huawei, Harvard CGA and Tutela, and on the heels of the VP-level appointment of Aaron Williams to lead the company’s open source community efforts.
As VP of Product Marketing, Justin Sears will focus on competitive positioning, product messaging, customer stories, sales enablement, field marketing, digital demand-generation and public and analyst relations. He joins MapD from Hortonworks, where he created product marketing programs positioning the company as the leader in open-source connected data platforms. He helped grow Hortonworks from fewer than 10 customers to a public company with 1,000 enterprise customers, including more than half of the US Fortune 100. Previously he led product marketing and product management programs at tech startups and public companies, including Symantec and Wells Fargo. He holds an MBA from UC Berkeley and a BA in International Relations from Stanford.
“MapD offers exactly the combined storage and visualization capabilities that I’ve dreamed about marketing for years,” said Justin Sears, VP of Product Marketing. “In MapD Core, we have an open source database that can deliver unprecedented speed at scale, and MapD Immerse powers visualization of those large datasets. Both run together seamlessly and are optimized for the innate advantages of GPUs over a CPU architecture. As a marketer at MapD, there is enormous potential as we go through the transition to GPU analytics. Our platform will change the way industries derive insight and business value from data.”
Joining as VP of Products, Ashish Sahu will lead product management at MapD. He was most recently VP of Product Marketing at Cask Data, a big data startup. Previously, Ashish was responsible for the marketing launch of geospatial and advanced analytics for SAP’s in-memory platform, SAP HANA, and held a mix of technical and product positions at Checkpoint and Motorola. Ashish has an MBA from UC Berkeley, a Masters in Information Systems from IIM, and a BS in Mechanical Engineering from NIT, India.
“MapD is harnessing GPU’s massive parallelism to deliver real-time analytics and render on-the-fly immersive spatial and data visualizations. The platform is rapidly being deployed in varied use cases, particularly where time and location matter, from large-scale geospatial analytics of telecom networks to building seamless machine learning workflows via the GOAI Initiative,” said Ashish Sahu, VP of Products. “We’ll be developing capabilities for different industry verticals and application scenarios to help companies quickly realize the transformative benefits of GPU computing. I look forward to continuing to foster the innovative spirit of MapD’s open source initiative by delivering an open enterprise-ready platform, with support for tools, connectors, and third-party integrations.”
Ashish Bambroo joins MapD as VP of Business Development. He will be responsible for all global partnerships, channels and resellers. Most recently, Ashish was Sr. Director at MuleSoft where he led embedded and OEM partnerships with the company’s largest partners. Previously at Intuit, he held senior management positions, most recently as Head of QuickBooks Hosting. Prior to that, he co-founded an ecommerce startup and, following its acquisition by payments company Brodia, led business development for that company. Earlier in his career, Ashish worked with a subsidiary of Samsung setting up international operations, later becoming Country Manager for India. Ashish holds an MBA from UCLA and a BS in Electrical Engineering from NIT, India.
“MapD already has great market traction with customers such as Verizon, and partners including Huawei and Nvidia. Our position at the heart of the GOAI Initiative together with leading open source machine learning vendors speaks to the potential of MapD’s platform,” said Ashish Bambroo, VP of Business Development. “I’m looking forward to extending our reach to other partners as understanding of the power of GPU-based analytics takes hold. Our open architecture makes MapD perfect for partners to build lightning-fast analytics into their software stack.”
MapD’s latest appointments follow a string of partnership announcements. Huawei and MapD have signed an integration agreement enhancing compatibility and interconnection between Huawei’s FusionServer hardware and the MapD analytics platform. Tutela and MapD teamed to create Tutela Explorer, a service for real-time analytics and visualization of Tutela’s massive crowdsourced dataset of mobile network and device performance. Most recently, MapD announced a partnership with the Harvard Center for Geographic Analysis (CGA) to build new geospatial functionality into the MapD Core database.
Earlier this month, Aaron Williams joined the company from Mesosphere where he ran global community efforts. Aaron will lead the development of MapD’s developer community, following the open sourcing of the MapD Core database and MapD’s cofounding of the GPU Open Analytics Initiative.
“We already see the extraordinary real-time use cases that the MapD platform unlocks for data scientists and business analysts,” said Todd Mostak, co-founder and CEO of MapD. “We’re thrilled that Justin, Ashish S and Ashish B are joining our leadership team. They’ve all helped take related companies from early stages to IPO, so know how to evangelize a new category, scale and gain market traction. Combined with Aaron’s skills to build our open source community, we’re poised for rapid growth as organizations realize their need for GPU-powered analytics.”


