Seegene Develops World’s First Multiplex MDx Assays With Its AI System

09 Jan 2018

The Company Succeeded In Developing Molecular Diagnostics (MDx) Assays In Only Four Days
Seegene, a leading developer of multiplex PCR technologies headquartered in South Korea, announced  that, utilizing a newly created artificial intelligence (AI) based assay development system, the company succeeded in developing molecular diagnostics (MDx) assays in only four (4) days. These assays are high multiplex real-time PCR reagents developed in their entirety by AI and are designed to simultaneously detect 8 different DNA targets for each of meningitis and sexually transmitted infections.
A spokesperson from Seegene confirmed that, “The performance (sensitivity and specificity) of the assays developed by AI are equivalent to or even better than that of those manually developed,” and also added, “Only four (4) days were sufficient by the AI system to successfully develop two 8-plex assays, while more than a year was required by a team of experienced professionals.”
This innovative AI-based automated assay development system, called the “Seegene Digitalized Development System (“SG-DDS”)”, has been achieved by incorporating Seegene’s proprietary know-how and patented technologies accumulated over the last 15 years in MDx assay development. This great stride was made possible with the collaborative works of 130 scientists from multidisciplinary fields from not only biology, bioinformatics and chemistry, but also statistics, mathematics, physics, electrical and mechanical engineering and computer sciences.
Utilizing big data of causative agents for diseases
SG-DDS automates real-time PCR assay development utilizing big data of causative agents for diseases, Seegene’s novel algorithms, and in silico oligonucleotide design with virtual experiments. This advancement significantly reduces the time and labor required for R&D and simplifies complicated real time PCR assay development processes, allowing non-professionals to easily develop multiplex MDx assays of their desire.
According to Dr. Jong-Yoon Chun, CEO and Founder of Seegene, “We have already witnessed AI surpassing human intelligence in developing medical devices. Therefore, all molecular diagnostic assays will be developed by AI instead of professional researchers.” He also added, “SG-DDS is now the most economical solution to MDx assay development as it saves time and labor, and will ultimately drive down the cost of molecular diagnostic tests, one of the biggest obstacles in MDx market. SG-DDS will lead to standardization of MDx system and promote tailor-made medical treatment.”
With SG-DDS, Project 100 will be completed to significantly increase the number of CE marked Allplex assays within this year. The pipeline includes assays that diagnose not only infectious diseases but also drug resistant, genetic disorders and various cancers including lung, breast and colon cancers.
Seegene’s current business focus is the human IVD market, but the company is also making preparations to pioneer non-human IVD areas as well. For its future assay portfolio, Seegene has included food safety, agriculture, aquaculture, animal health and other non-human related diagnostic assays to expand its already vast offerings. Further, Seegene plans to develop customized assays that can meet the varied needs of customers.


