Altair Nominated For Amazon Web Services (AWS) Industrial Software Competency

27 Apr 2018

APN Partners Will Undergo Rigorous AWS Technical Validation Related To Industry Specific Technology As Well As An Assessment Of The Security, Performance, And Reliability Of Their Solutions
Altair has been nominated for the Amazon Web Services (AWS) Industrial Software Competency. This nomination recognizes that Altair is a leading industry expert working closely with AWS and delivering effective solutions to help organizations manage critical issues pertaining to the Industrial Software industry. Achieving the AWS Industrial Software Competency status will further differentiate Altair as an AWS Partner Network (APN) member that has demonstrated deep technical proficiency and proven customer success, delivering solutions seamlessly on AWS. To receive this designation, APN Partners will undergo rigorous AWS technical validation related to industry specific technology as well as an assessment of the security, performance, and reliability of their solutions.
When the AWS Industrial Software Competency launches later this year, it will introduce a validated shortlist of APN Partners with solutions for end-to-end integration of Discrete and Process Manufacturing, highlighting leading AWS solutions in this space. The AWS Industrial Software Competency program will help customers select top APN Partners from tens of thousands in the AWS Partner Network with confidence.
“Altair is proud to be one of the first APN Partners nominated for the AWS Industrial Software Competency,” said Sam Mahalingam, Chief Technical Officer for Enterprise Solutions at Altair. “We are dedicated to helping customers in the industrial space achieve their business goals by leveraging our advanced enterprise solutions and the agility of AWS.”
AWS is enabling scalable, flexible, and cost-effective solutions from startups to global enterprises. To support the seamless integration and deployment of these solutions, AWS established the AWS Competency Program to help customers identify Consulting and Technology APN Partners with deep industry experience and expertise.
Engineered for simplicity and performance, Altair’s software solutions provide engineers, scientists and administrators access to, Computer aided engineering (CAE) applications, and High-Performance Computing (HPC). This technology enables users to cost effectively support, run, monitor and manage their simulation needs in the cloud to create robust CAE product designs.
Altair transforms design and decision making by applying simulation, machine learning and optimization throughout product life cycles. Our broad portfolio of simulation technology and patented units-based software licensing model enable Simulation-Driven Innovation™ for our customers. With more than 2,000 employees, Altair is headquartered in Troy, Michigan, USA and operates 69 offices throughout 24 countries. Altair serves more than 5,000 customers across broad industry segments.
Read More: Interview With Bryan Gold, Co-Founder, CEO At #Paid


