Virtuos Raises $15Million And Sets Up New HQ And R&D Center In Singapore

15 Mar 2018

The Move Consolidates Virtuos’ Position As A Global Leader In 3d Game Production And Sets The Stage For Further Growth
Virtuos, a leading video game content production company specializing in game development and AAA “Triple A” 3D art production for console and mobile titles, has announced the successful completion of a USD 15 million funding round, plus the set-up of a new headquarters and R&D center in Singapore.
Virtuos’ capital increase was led by new investor 3D Capital Partners, a JV partnership between French investment holding Enthéos and Hong-Kong-based Leitmotiv Private Equity. Gilles Langourieux remains the majority owner of the company, with the balance shared between Virtuos’ managers, 3D Capital Partners and long term investor Xuhui Venture Capital.
Gilles Langourieux
“The video game development industry is maturing and so is Virtuos. Today we can handle the increasingly complex in-game experience demanded by players on a growing and increasingly powerful range of platforms,” said Gilles Langourieux, CEO of Virtuos. “The company’s new structure, expanded funding, and R&D center in Singapore will ensure that we stay at the forefront of game technology innovation and continue to be the ideal partner for studios that are developing blockbuster games.”
Combined with additional bank financing, the new round of equity funding will support Virtuos in its next phase of accelerated growth and finance its buy-and-build strategy across different geographies. Together with the expansion of existing studios, a policy of acquiring and developing complementary businesses will see the business double in size within the next three years, expanding its current capabilities and scaling its ability to deliver high value-added services.
“We are delighted to join a successful team of talents, laser-focused on delivering value to the most demanding names in the $100+ billion gaming industry” said Guy d’Auriol, co-founder of Leitmotiv Private Equity and Chairman of 3D Capital Partners. “We look forward to contributing our entrepreneurial and financial expertise to their ambitious development plan”.
In anticipation of the company’s next development phase, Virtuos recently set up its corporate headquarters in the city state of Singapore in order to benefit from the renowned pool of scientific and managerial talent. Near the new headquarters, Virtuos is establishing a new R&D Center in partnership with Singapore’s Economic Development Board (EDB) to explore the latest computer graphics, rendering and production techniques. Virtuos plans to create 100 highly qualified jobs over the next 5 years in Singapore.
Founded in 2004, Virtuos is a leading video game content production company with operations in China, Vietnam, Canada, France, Japan, Ireland and the United States. With 1,500 full-time professionals, Virtuos specializes in game development and AAA 3D art production for consoles and mobile titles, enabling its clients to generate additional revenue and achieve greater operational efficiency.


