Codewise’s Dr. Rzeszuciński Joins The European AI Alliance, Launched By The European Commission

18 Jun 2018

The Commission Will Present Ethical Guidelines On AI Development By The End Of 2018, Based On The EU’s Charter of Fundamental Rights
Codewise, the industry’s first provider of AI-powered online ad measurement and management solutions for digital marketers, announced today that Dr. Paweł Rzeszuciński, Data Scientist at Codewise, accepted the invitation to become a member of the European AI Alliance, a forum launched by the European Commission.
Since Dr. Paweł Rzeszuciński will join the Alliance within his personal capacity, he will act independently and in the public interest, as per the rules set by the European Commission.
Following the signing of the Declaration of cooperation on Artificial Intelligence by 24 EU Member States and Norway, the European AI Alliance, as announced by the European Commission on April 25 2018, is a multi-stakeholder forum engaged in a broad and open discussion of all aspects of Artificial Intelligence development and its impact on the economy and society. The European AI Alliance is aimed at seizing the opportunities of AI, reinforcing Europe’scompetitiveness and establishing the ethical guidelines on the development of the AI.
Read More: Interview With Dorian Selz, Co-Founder & CEO, Squirro
Robert Gryn
Emphasizing the importance of the European AI Alliance, Robert Gryn, CEO of Codewise, said, “We are extremely proud to learn that Dr. Paweł Rzeszuciński, a key stakeholder of Codewise’s Artificial Intelligence development team, is joining such a strategic initiative. AI is progressively transforming our economy and society and is increasingly contributing to many sectors of our economy. We feel very reassured by the European Commission’s initiative to support the implementation of a European strategy on AI.”
The Commission will present ethical guidelines on AI development by the end of 2018, based on the EU’s Charter of Fundamental Rights, taking into account principles such as data protection and transparency, and building on the work of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies. To help develop these guidelines, the Commission will bring together all relevant stakeholders at the European AI Alliance.
Dr. John Malatesta
“The mission of the European AI Alliance strongly resonates with Codewise’s values and vision of transparency-led smart technologies,” said Dr. John Malatesta, President and Chief Revenue and Marketing Officer at Codewise. “As any technology that has a direct impact on people’s and businesses’ lives, the emergence of AI also raises legitimate concerns. We fully endorse the elaboration by the European Commission of recommendations on future AI-related policy development and on ethical, legal and societal issues. In our daily efforts to develop AI technologies at the service of digital marketers, we are equally attentive to the right balance between business efficiency gains on one side and respect for privacy and transparency on the other. The definition of an AI strategy framework will help the entire software industry align to common standards.”
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?
The foundation of the European AI Alliance represents the first step towards an EU-wide approach to AI. By establishing clear guidelines on AI ethics, the Commission seeks to increase consumers’ trust in AI-driven products.
Based on the recommendations enacted by the European AI Alliance, the European Commission and participating Member States will present a European plan on Artificial Intelligence by the end of 2018.


