CES 2018: Turing Video And Segway Robotics Introduce Intelligent Security Robot NIMBO

17 Jan 2018

Nimbo Leverages The Proven Segway Robotics’ Mobility Platform And Is Created With Cutting-Edge AI Capabilities, Making It Intelligent As Well As Affordable
Turing Video unveils its new intelligent security robot, Nimbo, at CES 2018. Nimbo leverages the proven Segway Robotics’ mobility platform and is created with cutting-edge A.I. capabilities, making it intelligent as well as affordable.
As its name would suggest, the robot is nimble – quick and agile, both physically and mentally. Nimbo can be pre-programmed to patrol specific routes or self-optimized routes while analyzing human activities and surrounding environments in real time. It is designed to detect security violations or anomalies and approach the area with light/audio/video warnings that correspond to the situation. It collects HD video evidence and pushes notifications to security personnel including live video streaming to mobile devices. It also supports two-way audio, 24/7 continuous video history and auto charging stations.
Nimbo’s unique mobility platform is powered by Segway Robotics, which is backed by Intel and Xiaomi. With industry-leading sensors on board, such as Intel RealSense, the base provides stability and flexibility for indoor and outdoor use. It can handle rough or uneven pavement and move over speed bumps, while the relatively small size (30-inch height and 25-inch width) enables it to fit in narrow spaces. Additionally, the robot can be switched to the “Ride-On Mode”, a distinctive feature that allows a security staff member to step on and ride it up to 11 mph.
Nimbo can patrol large company campuses, industrial warehouses, high-rise parking structures or parking lots, etc. Depending on application scenarios, it can be tailor-made to meet specific needs, e.g. communicating with drones, integrating with security management systems, adding extra sensors or readers. The extraordinary customizability is empowered by Segway platform that grants access to its vision, speech, locomotion, connectivity, interactive and other hardware extension.
 


