Beautiful.AI Launches The First AI-Powered Presentation Design Tool

12 Feb 2018

Company raises $5 M from First Round Capital and Shasta Ventures to automate the design of everyday work
Beautiful.AI today announced the launch of the first artificial intelligence-powered presentation tool, which enables anyone to build clean, modern, and professionally-designed slides – quickly and easily.
Beautiful.AI addresses the two biggest challenges that individuals face in creating effective visual presentations: slide design and production time. According to the 2018 Presentation Quality Gap survey, 73 percent of presenters have felt “self-conscious” about the visual appearance of their slides and 62 percent have delivered a presentation that didn’t meet their own standards because they “ran out of time.”
Mitch Grasso
“We’ve all experienced those moments – tinkering with text boxes at 2 a.m., drawing boxes and circles and then trying to align them, or spending hours looking for the right image for our slide,” said Mitch Grasso, founder, Beautiful.AI. “We’re using AI to give users the benefits of professional-quality design without the pain of spending hours, or even days, perfecting their presentations.”
Beautiful.AI is built on the company’s Design AI technology, which uses heuristic techniques to apply the rules of good design in real time, saving users time and ensuring their presentations follow best practices. The system also automatically applies constraints to prevent users from violating these best practices, such as typing too much text on a slide.
The tool features more than 50 built-in “smart” templates to help users visualize their ideas instantly, all of which can be easily customized within minutes using simple, intuitive controls and automated design features. A searchable image library is also available with millions of custom icons and royalty-free images that are automatically placed and formatted for the user.
Beautiful.AI has raised $5 million in Series A funding to support the testing, development and expansion of its AI-powered technology. First Round Capital, the first investor in Uber, and Shasta Ventures, one of the first investors in Nest, participated in the round.
Prior to Beautiful.AI, Mitch Grasso was founder and CEO of SlideRocket, cloud-based presentation software that focused on team collaboration with enterprise customers including Discovery Networks, Disney, Sony, and Twenty-First Century Fox. SlideRocket was acquired by VMware in 2011.
Beautiful.AI was launched today at the annual SaaStr conference, held in San Francisco from February 6-8 (Booth 80). The company also announced that the tool is currently free to use for all users through June 2018.


