WENN Digital To Enable The Future Of Fan Engagement And Image Protection Through The KODAKOne Platform

02 Jul 2018

KODAKOne Platform, An Image Rights Management And Protection Platform Secured In The Blockchain, Will Become The Exclusive Image Registration, Protection And License-Monitoring Solution
ICOx Innovations Inc, who is in the business of designing and creating crypto economies is pleased to announce that their client, WENN Digital has today announced that they have agreed in principle with the two-time Formula 1 World Champion and World Endurance Championship (WEC) driver, Fernando Alonso, to protect his professional and personal images and videos. As part of the partnership, KODAKOne Platform, an image rights management and protection platform secured in the blockchain, will become the exclusive image registration, protection and license-monitoring solution for certain images and videos of Alonso – including currently archived items and images and videos taken in the future.
The agreement between Alonso and WENN Digital will provide an opportunity to Alonso’s global fanbase to access the to-be-launched KODAKOne Platform – enabling them to not only upload, register and protect their own photos and videos of their favorite F1 driver, but be rewarded for doing so in certain instances.
 Follow Us
“We live in a world driven by content distribution across different channels, especially during such large events as F1 and WEC,” said Alonso, who just won the 24 Hours of Le Mans race in Le Mans, France. “I’m very excited to know that I have the ability to reward my fans and professional photographers for their creativity, and that the content they produce can be protected by a single platform.”
As part of this new level of fan engagement and rewards, Alonso and WENN Digital also intend to build a platform that will reward fans and media content producers for an array of products and services around Alonso.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
Jan Denecke
“We are honored that Fernando Alonso is working with WENN Digital and the KODAKOne platform to secure his global image rights,” said Jan Denecke, CEO of WENN Digital. “Fernando is a world-renowned athlete, and his trust in our platform further validates what we stand for. We couldn’t have asked for a better partner to work with in rolling out our KODAKOne platform services.”
Cameron Chell
“This solidifies our vision of the opportunity KODAKOne has in the global market. This is a real issue for high-profile public figures and their ability to control their own IP.  ICOx Innovations goal is to create crypto economies that have a real impact for people, business or charitable organizations” said Cameron Chell, Chairman of ICOx Innovations.
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs


