LG Electronics Launches ‘ThinQ’ For Its AI Initiatives

29 Dec 2017

New Brand Paves Way for LG’s Vision to Become Human-Centered AI Company
LG Electronics is announcing the creation of the ThinQ brand to identify its 2018 home appliances, consumer electronics and services that utilize artificial intelligence. LG ThinQ products and services will all have the ability to employ deep learning and communicate with one another to make consumers’ lives easier, utilizing a variety of AI technologies from other partners as well as LG’s own AI technology, DeepThinQ.
LG Electronics Launches ‘ThinQ’ for its AI Initiative
LG first laid the foundation for its AI efforts at CES 2017 when it announced DeepThinQ followed by the initiative to include Wi-Fi in its entire line of premium appliances launched this year. Advancing the company’s innovations in AI, LG opened the Artificial Intelligence Lab in Seoul in June under company’s CTO to tie together all its diverse AI research in technologies that recognize, deduce and learn from voice, video, and sensors. LG’s AI Lab has contributed to the development of the world’s first space-learning air conditioner as well as intelligent refrigerators, washing machines and robot vacuum cleaners.
David VanderWaal
“Our new ThinQ platform for LG’s intelligent products is the latest way that LG is delivering innovations that make consumers’ lives easier and more enjoyable,” said David VanderWaal, vice president of marketing for LG Electronics USA. “LG ThinQ enables deep learning technology and connectivity across household products, delivering even greater capabilities and convenience.”
In the United States, LG already offers the most extensive range of Wi-Fi enabled appliances available* today featuring its LG SmartThinQ™ Wi-Fi connectivity. With one app, available for Android or iOS, it’s simple to manage all LG appliances even when you’re not at home. It even works with voice control via the Google Assistant and Amazon Alexa. Plus, every LG appliance with SmartThinQ technology is built on an open platform, which means they’ll work with evolving smart technologies and devices for years to come. The company will continue to advance SmartThinQ and expand its AI capabilities under the new LG ThinQ brand in 2018.
CES 2018 visitors are encouraged to check out the ThinQ Zone featuring LG’s diverse offering of AI products for 2018 at the LG booth in Las Vegas Convention Center (Booth #11100, Central Hall) from Jan. 9-12.
* Based on manufacturer published specifications as of September 2017.


