Cryptocurrency Power Couple Stacy Herbert & Max Keiser To Throw Down At Cyber Investing Summit May 15th In New York City

01 May 2018

Keiser Report Co-Hosts Stacy Herbert & Max Keiser to Host Digital Currency Breach Protection Panel at the Third Annual Cyber Investing Summit
Calling all crypto OGs and noobies! The outspoken first couple of cryptocurrencies, Stacy Herbert and Max Keiser, will be taking over the closing panel at the Third Annual Cyber Investing Summit, a unique all-day conference focused on the financial opportunities and trends in the rapidly growing cybersecurity industry, Tuesday, May 15th, 2018 in New York City.
The Keiser Report co-hosts and early bitcoin evangelists will lead a thought-provoking and timely conversation highlighting the growing need for security and risk solutions in the digital currency world and beyond. The Keiser Report was the first international financial news program to cover bitcoin as early as 2011 when the cryptocurrency was still under $3.
Jeremy Welch
As accelerating cryptocurrency adoption continues to disrupt traditional financial, monetary and economic paradigms, this all-star crypto-security panel reviews the urgency of securing both the individual and network value of cryptoassets.
Joining the indefatigable duo is Jeremy Welch, Founder and CEO of Casa, a digital multi-signature wallet used to safely store cryptocurrencies, and Alena Vranova, Co-Founder and Former CEO of Satoshi Labs, which launched the first bitcoin hardware wallet. Rounding out the panel are Jose Rodriguez, VP of Payments at Bitso, LATAM’s largest cryptocurrency exchange and blockchain based financial services company, and Hartej Sawhney, Founder of Hosho, a leader in blockchain security.
“Security is the hot topic in crypto right now. It’s an underdeveloped scaling issue for an industry growing by hundreds of billions, but without an equally robust growth in security,” said Max Keiser. “The excellent speakers on this panel are front-line technologists making crypto a safer place. Really looking forward to hosting this panel at the Cyber Investing Summit 2018.”


