Salesforce To Join Global Leaders In Paris For Inaugural Tech For Good Summit

21 May 2018

President and Chief Strategy Officer Alex Dayon To Participate In Gathering Of World’s Top Technology And Business Leaders For A Discussion On How Disruptive Technologies Can Have A Positive Impact On Our Societies And Economies
Salesforce is the first-ever Equality Sponsor of Viva Technology, one of Europe’s largest technology conferences, reinforcing its commitment to equality in France and around the globe. Salesforce recently announced plans to invest $2.2 billion in its French business over the next five years.
Salesforce, the global leader in CRM, will join global business and technology leaders in Paris this week for the inaugural Tech for Good Summit, hosted by President of France Emmanuel Macron. Participants will discuss how disruptive technologies can have a positive impact on our societies and economies by reducing the digital divide, decreasing equality gaps, and readjusting the imbalance between emerging and developed economies.
The gathering is being held on May 23 at the Palais de l’Elysée, in advance of Viva Technology, one of Europe’s largest technology conferences, which is also taking place this week in Paris. Salesforce is partnering with Viva Technology as its first-ever Equality Sponsor—reinforcing its commitment to equality in France, which helped earn Salesforce the #1 Best Workplace in France by Great Place to Work.
In support of this week’s global technology discussions in France, Salesforce last month pledged to invest in growth, equality, innovation and customer success in the country. Specifically, Salesforce announced plans to invest $2.2 Billion in its French business over the next five years.
Join Salesforce at Viva Technology
Salesforce Equality Lounge: As the first-ever Equality Sponsor, Salesforce will host the Salesforce Equality Lounge, which is open to all Viva Technology attendees May 24-25. Located in the Hall of Tech, attendees can learn about how to stand up as an ally for underrepresented individuals and groups, hear what companies are doing to lead on Equality in Europe, as well as rest and recharge. On May 26, Salesforce will open its lounge space to the City of Paris to promote ParisCode, an initiative designed to train 1,000 new developers and coders per year through 2020.
Future of Work Roundtable: On May 24 at 12:40 p.m. CET, Alex Dayon will participate in a roundtable on the future of work. The roundtable will be located on Stage One at the Viva Technology conference.
Equality Roundtable: On May 25 at 1:15 p.m. CET, Salesforce Chief Equality Officer Tony Prophet will participate in a roundtable on equality. The roundtable will be located in the Salesforce Equality Lounge in the Hall of Tech.
Salesforce, the global CRM leader, empowers companies to connect with their customers in a whole new way.
Read More: Interview With Paul McGough, CTO, Qwyit


