AiCure Named To The 2018 AI 100, Highlighting Advancements In Artificial Intelligence For Patient Monitoring

30 Dec 2017

CB Insights Unveils Second Annual AI 100 Companies at A-ha!
CB Insights has named AiCure to the prestigious AI 100, a select group of promising private companies working on groundbreaking artificial intelligence technology. CB Insights CEO and co-founder Anand Sanwal will reveal the full list of the second annual AI 100 companies at the A-ha! conference in San Francisco.
“Last year’s AI 100 enjoyed amazing success in the year since earning this recognition. 55 of them went onto raise additional funding nearing $2B and 5 were acquired.
Artificial Intelligence for Continuous Patient Monitoring
Anand Sanwal
This year’s list was culled from 1000+ applications and looks even more impressive.  These are companies using artificial intelligence in industries from drug discovery and cybersecurity to robotics and legal tech.  I’m happy that CB Insights is able to shine a light on the founders and companies that will revolutionize these industries and look forward to seeing what they do in 2018 and beyond.” said CB Insights CEO Anand Sanwal.
Adam Hanina
Adam Hanina, co-founder and CEO of AiCure, commented: “We are delighted to be recognized as one of the world’s 100 most innovative AI companies. AiCure is tackling the multibillion dollar problem of failed trials and poor clinical outcomes. Our visual recognition platform is creating enormous impact and value through intelligent observation.”
The CB Insights research team selected the AI 100 companies based on criteria, examining company-submitted data and the company’s Mosaic Score. The Mosaic Score, based on CB Insights’ National Science Foundation-funded algorithm, measures the overall health and growth potential of private companies. Through this evidence-based, statistically-driven approach, the Mosaic Score can help predict a company’s momentum, market health and financial viability.
Companies such as Flatiron Health, Babylon, and Freenome joined AiCure in being recognized for their innovative technology in front of an audience of 400 senior innovation executives from around the world and news outlets including The Financial Times, CNBC, Reuters, Bloomberg and the Washington Post.
 


