Acacia Communications Named “Best 5G Architecture And Deep-Fiber Framework” Provider

10 Jul 2018

NGON & DCI Awards recognizes advancements made in coherent modules
Acacia Communications, Inc., a leading provider of high-speed coherent optical interconnect products, today announced it was recognized for “Best 5G Architecture and Deep-Fiber Framework” at this year’s Next Generation Optical Networking (NGON) and DCI 2018 event that took place from June 26-28 in Nice, France.
The awards recognize the achievements of operators, data centers and solution providers in the optical networking industry. The “Best 5G Architecture and Deep-Fiber Framework” honor was based on innovative contributions Acacia has made that have advanced its customers and the optical networking industry.  Submissions were judged by a panel of network operators and industry analyst firms.
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?
“We are honored to accept this prestigious award,” said Raj Shanmugaraj, President and Chief Executive Officer of Acacia Communications. “Based on our experience, we see coherent moving from metro core to access aggregation networks such as 5G backhaul and fiber deep Remote PHY for cable access.  Access networks delivering high bandwidth services could dramatically increase energy requirements to power and cool the equipment providing these services. We believe Acacia is on the forefront of providing the high performance, low power, compact form factor solutions necessary to help enable data centers to run on sustainable energy.”
Shorter reach applications are believed to be an emerging opportunity for coherent optical interconnects, and are receiving significant attention from industry standards organizations such as CableLabs that has published coherent standards for cable access networks.
On June 25, 2018, Acacia announced the introduction of two new high-speed coherent optical interconnect products for “ZR” applications – CFP2-DCO ZR and CFO-DCO ZR.  These products were designed to address the aforementioned 5G and fiber deep applications, as well as data center edge and enterprise campus applications.  In addition, Acacia’s CFP2-DCO module is well-suited to the requirements of the emerging coherent access market to help network operators reduce operational and capital expenses, increase reach and accelerate time-to-market of high-capacity solutions.
Read More: How “System Mindfulness” is changing the FMCG Industry


