Adobe Completes Acquisition Of Magento Commerce

20 Jun 2018

The Magento Platform Brings Together Digital Commerce, Order Management And Predictive Intelligence To Enable Shopping Experiences That Scale For Businesses Of Any Size
Adobe announced the completion of its acquisition of Magento Commerce, a market-leading commerce platform. The addition of the Magento Commerce Cloud to the Adobe Experience Cloud will deliver a single, end-to-end digital experience platform including content creation, marketing, advertising, analytics and commerce for B2B and B2C customers. The Magento Platform brings together digital commerce, order management and predictive intelligence to enable shopping experiences that scale for businesses of any size.
Adobe is the world’s leader in designing and delivering digital experiences. At the core of every great experience are content and data, which enable the consistent, personal, intuitive experiences consumers have come to expect. Commerce is integral to the customer experience—whether on the web, mobile, social, in-product or in-store. Adding commerce to the Adobe Experience Cloud enables our customers to make every moment personal and every experience shoppable.
Read More: Scale To Discuss How Self-Driving Cars Will Handle Unexpected Real-World Scenarios At The Information’s Autonomous Vehicles Summit
Magento Commerce Cloud brings digital commerce and order orchestration for both physical and digital goods across a range of industries, including consumer packaged goods, retail, wholesale, manufacturing and the public sector. The Magento Platform is built on proven, scalable technology supported by a vibrant community of more than 300,000 developers. The Magento partner ecosystem provides thousands of pre-built extensions, including payment, shipping, tax and logistics. This level of flexibility enables businesses to quickly ramp and iterate their commerce experience with their changing business needs.
Bradley Rencher
“Across every industry, people aren’t just buying products, they’re buying experiences,” said Brad Rencher, executive vice president and general manager, Digital Experience, Adobe. “Adobe is the leader in delivering end-to-end digital experiences and with Magento Commerce, Adobe will further solidify its leadership position.”
Read More: Jane.Ai Launches To Eliminate Wasted Time In The Workplace By Putting The Power Of Artificial Intelligence At The Fingertips Of All Employees
Mark Lavelle
“Digital transformation starts with a creative spark or a specific business need and comes to life with best-in-class technology,” said Mark Lavelle, CEO, Magento. “As a part of Adobe, we see a tremendous business opportunity to power experience-driven commerce for brands and merchants of all sizes.”
With the acquisition now closed, Magento Commerce CEO Mark Lavelle will lead the Magento Commerce Cloud business, reporting to executive vice president and general manager of Adobe’s Digital Experience business unit, Brad Rencher.


