WaveOptics Collaborates With EV Group To Drive Augmented Reality (AR) Manufacturing At Scale

05 May 2018

Mass Production Solution For Waveguides Set To Bring Quality Consumer AR Wearables To Market For $600
WaveOptics, the world leading designer and manufacturer of diffractive waveguides, today announced a collaboration with EV Group (EVG), a leading supplier of wafer bonding and nano-imprint lithography equipment, to bring high-performance augmented reality (AR) waveguides to the mass market at the lowest cost available in the industry today. Waveguides are the key optical component for wearable AR.
This collaboration is key to unlocking the development of AR wearables; together we are well positioned to bring mass market innovation in AR, opening new paths to scalability at a lower cost than ever before.
Markus Wimplinger, Corporate technology development and IP director at EVG added: “We develop new technologies and processes to outperform the most complex challenges, helping our customers to successfully commercialize their new product ideas. For the proliferation of our leading-edge Nanoimprint Lithography (NIL) technology, we have created our NILPhotonics Competence Center.
“Within this framework, which has strong policies to protect our customers’ IP, we support our customers on their product development and commercialization journey from the feasibility to the production phase. This is exactly what we are doing today with WaveOptics, an established leader in AR, to provide a truly scalable solution to end customers.”
The collaborative development efforts within EVG’s NILPhotonics Competence Center framework are aligned to support WaveOptics’ commitment to unlocking the mass market adoption of AR across all leading market segments – industrial, enterprise and consumer and follow the launch of the Company’s Module Program.
Through the pilot line manufacturing infrastructure offered by the Center, WaveOptics will exceed the projected demand it has seen from its customers for the next quarters, with a proven path to transferring high-volume production processes and equipment to designated facilities capable of producing waveguides at scale for top global OEM brands.
WaveOptics’ collaboration with EVG highlights its commitment to help customers bring AR displays to market by offering high performance, commercial waveguides at an attainable price point. Leveraging EVG’s expertise in equipment and process technology for volume manufacturing will allow AR-end user products to hit the market by 2019 for under $600 – the lowest price point in the industry today.
WaveOptics is the world-leading designer and manufacturer of diffractive waveguides, the key optical component in wearable AR devices.
AR wearables, such as smart glasses, enable users to see digital images overlaid on top of the real world. There are two key elements that allow these images to be seen – a light source such as a minute projector and a means of transferring the image from the projector into the user’s eyes.
WaveOptics’ waveguide technology transfers light waves from the light source and projects them into the user’s eye. The technology produces a large eye-box, binocular viewing and a high field of view. The eye-box (the viewing window) is the size of the AR display from which the full image is visible. WaveOptics’ waveguides deliver crisp, undistorted text as well as stable imagery.
WaveOptics technology is designed to be used for immersive AR experiences in Industrial, enterprise and consumer markets. The Company aims for its waveguides to be the core optical component used in all AR wearable devices, driven by its unique technology and expertise, which enable unparalleled manufacturing scalability and visual performance as well as versatility for numerous applications.
Read More: Getting To Know BYTON Concept — The World’s First Smart Intuitive Vehicle


