A Hybrid-Decentralised Marketplace And Content Sharing Platform Poised To Disrupt The Virtual Reality Industry

31 Jan 2018

ImmVRse Offers A Platform For Brands Looking To Branch Out Into The New And Compelling World of VR, Allowing Them To Hire Content Creators In A Quick, Easy And Convenient Manner
VR content creation has unlimited potential and will undoubtedly continue to innovate and push the boundaries of our imaginations, connecting to audiences on a deeper level than any previous medium. As the demand for specific and high-quality VR content increases, ImmVRse steps in as a platform that aims to sustain and accelerate the growth of VR content development across multiple industries.
ImmVRse is a decentralised VR content sharing platform that will allow VR content creators, brands and advertisers around the world to inspire, collaborate, and produce some of the highest-quality VR content available online. The application will act as both a marketplace and a content distribution platform. ImmVRse will employ its own unique digital currency, the ImmVRse token (IMV), which will be used as the form of payment between all parties within the ecosystem.
Though there are currently multiple platforms that support VR, they are generally dominated by 180/2D content creators, which does little to encourage and stimulate the growth of VR content. ImmVRse hopes to provide an environment where VR content creators can effectively showcase their content online with a more dedicated platform, leading to direct employment opportunities, regardless of geographical restrictions.
All transactions within the ImmVRse ecosystem will be validated and encrypted using Ethereum’s smart contract function, which in turn will eliminate the need for an arbitrary third party or financial controllers. Brands that wish to hire content creators may pay for their services using the token, while advertisers will also be able to run their own advertisements within the platform.
Control and the power of sharing will be shifted towards the community, thereby removing centralised decision-making and any third party from the workflow. The job creation and hiring process will also be peer-to-peer, using the smart contracts function; the brands and the content creators will both set their own parameters. The contract will then be deployed on the blockchain and payments will be processed based on mutually agreed deadlines between parties.
The biggest problem that ImmVRse will remedy as a blockchain platform is payment. There will be no high transaction fees, no requirements for bank accounts or any restrictions for users. Using ImmVRse tokens, it will take mere seconds to send and receive payments anywhere around the world without paying a processing fee to a bank or any third party money transfers. This will open the door to many content creators in countries where citizens may be under certain geographical and administrative restrictions imposed by local legislative authority.
The ImmVRse team consists of highly talented and knowledgeable members possessing an average of more than 15 years of hands-on industry experience. Team members and advisors are experienced in managing large-scale multi-million dollar projects and skilled in marketing, infrastructure development, process specialisation, human resources and blockchain disciplines. The team’s ability to develop complex projects, paired with their expertise in crypto-trading and investing, builds a solid foundation for a successful blockchain start-up.
By combining two up-and-coming technologies, the potential in VR and blockchain, ImmVRse hopes to combine the best of both worlds and create one of the largest decentralised creative platforms that is run both efficiently and effectively. A platform where both technologies are able to flourish side-by-side, resulting in a product that will revolutionize VR content as we know it.


