NRF18: Business Leaders Experience Customer Stories, Augmented Reality Tour

16 Jan 2018

SAS Spotlights Omnichannel Analytics at Retail Industry’s Biggest Event
NRF 107th Annual Convention and EXPO — A retailer’s data paints a technicolor picture of customers and inventory if managed properly. But some retail organizations haven’t taken the right steps to clearly see their data picture yet. Omnichannel analytics from SAS can help retail professionals make in-store and online merchandise decisions while deftly juggling inventory, pricing and personalized marketing efforts. Retailers wanting to learn more about SAS will have their chance during the NRF Big Show, going on this week inside New York City’s Jacob K. Javits Center.
SAS Omnichannel analytics helps retailers keep the customer at the heart of all decisions
Analytics helps blur the line between digital and physical shopping
SAS will showcase “Meet the Andersons,” an augmented reality customer journey seen through a family’s shopping preferences while furnishing a child’s first college dorm room. While nothing quite replaces seeing, trying, smelling or tasting a product, emerging technologies are blurring the line between digital and physical shopping.
Visitors to SAS Booth 3145 can experience the hands-on augmented reality tour that illustrates how analytics drives digital relevance based on demographics, household preferences, past in-store behavior and inventory optimization. The interactive tour highlights how analytics – including SAS® Real-Time Decision Manager, SAS® Merchandise Intelligence, SAS® Event Stream Processing, SAS® Customer Intelligence 360 and SAS® Viya products – supports contemporary retailers whether they’re adopting IoT sensors, beacons or RFID tags or stepping up to an even higher level with chatbots, artificial intelligence and machine learning to understand customers’ needs and preferences.
Progressive customer executives also will share stories of how analytics helps their omnichannel strategy during in-booth demos throughout the show and during a Big Ideas Session, “How Omnichannel Analytics Satisfies Customers Who Can Shop Anywhere, Anytime,” on Monday, Jan. 15, starting at 1:30 p.m. ET, in EXPO Hall Room 4 on Level 3 of the Javits Center.
Dan Mitchell
“With hundreds of online and offline customer touchpoints, accurate data management and analytics are a fundamental necessity to modern retailers,” said Dan Mitchell, SAS Global Director of Retail and CPG. “Because consumers demand relevant, timely, consistent interactions with their preferred retailers, the only way to act upon that data is to apply analytics to reveal insight and predict outcomes that enhance that lifelong relationship.”


