Actifio Names ValueData Technologies Its Authorized Distributor For Fast-Growing India And South Asia Markets

26 May 2018

Gartner Estimates India IT Spending Will Reach $87 Billion in 2018
Actifio, the Data-as-a-Service company, today announced the appointment of ValueData Technologies Pvt. Ltd. as its authorized distributor for India and South Asia, a region that includes several of the world’s fastest-growing economies. Through this new strategic alliance, Actifio will be able to leverage ValueData Technologies’ value-added distribution skills and market presence to reach a very large channel base and provide them with Actifio’s robust suite of data management solutions. Gartner estimates IT spending in India will reach $87.1 billion in 2018, with enterprise software the market’s fastest-growing segment.
Read More: Trescon’s World Blockchain Summit To Touchdown In Frankfurt
Headquartered in Mumbai, Maharashtra, India, ValueData Technologies provides its customers with a hyper-focused “data-to-value” portfolio of products, solutions and services to help companies build up their data ecosystems. As a value-added distributor of Actifio, customers within the ValueData Technologies channel ecosystem will now gain access to Actifio’s state-of-the-art data management solutions that will enable them to design and build a customized data infrastructure, on premise or in the cloud, that can be upgraded, edited or replaced with zero effect to their business operations.
Ronald Fernandes, Head of Business Development and Sales for ValueData Technologies, said, “We are very excited to expand our alliance with Actifio in this official capacity. As ValueData Technologies has always had a focus on data-to-value, Actifio’s data-as-a-service mission through its backup management and data virtualization solutions among others complements our efforts perfectly, and we are fortunate to offer our customers a complete range of data-focused solutions under a single banner.”
Read More: How Citizen Health Is Redesigning Healthcare With An Open & Transparent Marketplace
Ash Ashutosh
Ravi Kollipara
Ash Ashutosh, co-founder and CEO of Actifio, said, “As we expand our global reach, this alliance with ValueData Technologies will be instrumental in providing value added distribution to accelerate our growth throughout India and the South Asia region. With ValueData Technologies customers looking to transition their technology infrastructures, Actifio is proud to offer them a prime data backup management solution that will seamlessly merge into their suite of data-focused solutions.”
Ravi Kollipara, Vice President and Country Manager of Actifio India, said, “India and the South Asia region represent some of the world’s fastest-growing economies and IT markets. These are high-growth markets for Actifio because our platform enables organizations manage and protect their data and provide instant access to it regardless of hardware platform or cloud service.”
Read More: How Citizen Health Is Redesigning Healthcare With An Open & Transparent Marketplace


