Dogtown Media’s New AI Voice Chatbot Sends Personalized Birthday Wishes

04 Jan 2018

Shoutout Claims to be The First-Of-Its-Kind Chatbot That Shows A More Human Side Of Artificial Intelligence
Dogtown Media wants to bring out the human side of artificial intelligence (AI) with the release of its new AI chatbot, ShoutOut. A first of its kind, ShoutOut aims to emphasize the possible conversational capabilities of AI. For its first foray, the chatbot allows users to send personalized birthday cards to friends or family. The App Allows Users To Easily Create And Send Personalized Birthday Cards To Friends And Family Through The Google Home And Google Assistant Platforms.
Marc Fisher
CEO Marc Fisher is excited about the potential that this new AI development demonstrates with its birthday messages: “Using artificial intelligence to bring happiness to loved ones is very rewarding and we can’t wait to deliver more joyful experiences like this as technology continues to evolve.”
The AI app developers at Dogtown Media focused on sending birthday cards for ShoutOut’s debut because the action was simple and relatable. The app was developed to be used on the Google Home and Google Assistant platforms, with an emphasis on ease-of-use. The user simply inputs the recipient name and number, sender name, and personal message through either voice or text. The card’s design was based off of these inputs and MMS messaging, the format it is received in.
Dogtown Media is a mobile media development company headquartered in Venice Beach, California with a presence in San Francisco, New York City, and London. Since 2011, the team of hardened techies has launched over 100 apps, and counting. They are rapidly expanding our design and development services to leverage cutting-edge possibilities in artificial intelligence, augmented reality, IoT, mobile commerce, geo-location, mobile app analytics, multi-media publishing, mobile photo and video technology and financial services.
Their CEO Marc is a front-end developer and UX/UI designer with over a decade of experience launching custom software for web and mobile. Before co-founding Dogtown Media in 2011, Marc was involved in a number of start-ups and established companies, where he built a reputation for inspiring interface designs and efficient team management.


