Jvion Releases Latest Cognitive Machine Vector Aimed At Lowering Rates Of No-Show Appointments

28 May 2018

Artificial Intelligence and Healthcare Leader Jvion Released the Latest Cognitive Machine Vector Designed To Help Providers Better Manage No-Show Appointments and Improve Patient Engagement
Jvion, the leader in Eigen-based cognitive machine technology for healthcare, released their latest vector aimed at lowering rates of no-show appointments. By delivering insights into patients at risk of a missed appointment and the actions that will most effectively drive patient attendance, providers have a new, powerful tool to help lower rates of no-shows and drive patient engagement.
Patient no-shows—which include not showing up for an appointment, cancelling too close to a scheduled appointment, and showing up too late for an appointment—cost providers money, time, and resources. Reports estimate that between 14-50% of all primary care appointments result in a no-show. While the total cost per no-show varies by specialty, the negative impact to a provider’s income can range between 14-20% or even higher.
While no-shows are hard on providers, they have far worse consequences for patients. Chronically missed appointments can lead to miss prevention and screening procedures, poor chronic disease mismanagement, and the greater likelihood of an admission to the hospital.
Read More: CarePredict Unveiling AI-Powered Elder Care Technology Platform
Jvion’s no-show vector will deliver the insights that providers need so they can optimize operations and increase at-risk patient engagement.
For each patient scheduled for an appointment, the Cognitive Machine identifies: 
Those patients at-risk of a no-show appointment
The clinical and non-clinical drivers behind the risk including factors such as a history of no-shows, language barriers, behavioral health co-mobilities, and lack of transportation
The specific actions that will help ensure that an individual patient makes his or her appointment
Todd Schlesinger
“With the Jvion machine, providers know when overbooking appointments is the best strategy to mitigate potential operational losses and when actions such as text reminders, phone calls, transportation, and patient incentives will drive patient attendance,” said Todd Schlesinger, VP for Jvion. “With this vector, providers can better manage no-shows, protect their revenues, and help more patients stay engaged and healthy.”
Jvion’s Cognitive Machine uses Eigen-based technology to help providers take the actions that will improve patient health. Our approach enables the transposition of patients directly onto the machine so that providers can immediately ask 50+ questions about a patient’s health, risk, and impactability. For each question, the machine delivers an individual patient’s risk; the clinical and non-clinical factors propelling the risk; and the most effective actions/interventions to mitigate the risk. The machine is an AI Asset that delivers ROI within weeks, future-proofs the organization, and drives a greater guarantee of success by avoiding the pitfalls of models builds and predictive analytics.
Read More: Leading Blockchain Healthcare Companies Enter Exclusive Partnership To Ethically Share Biobank Data


