CHRISTUS Health To Modernize Systems With Infor

19 Jun 2018

Infor Cloudsuite Healthcare to Form Backbone of Digital Transformation Journey for Global Healthcare Provider
Infor, a leading provider of industry-specific cloud applications, today announced that CHRISTUS Health, a top ten Catholic Healthcare System in the U.S. and Latin America, has kicked off a digital transformation initiative with the selection of Infor CloudSuite Healthcare. The first phase of the project involves modernizing CHRISTUS Health’s core systems across its more than 60 hospitals and long-term care facilities, and 33,000 employees in the United States with Infor CloudSuite Healthcare. A comprehensive healthcare-specific solution, Infor CloudSuite Healthcare will help automate core processes in financial, human capital, and supply chain management, as well as provide clinical integration to enable CHRISTUS to deliver even greater patient care and satisfaction.
With headquarters in Irving Texas, CHRISTUS is made up of more than 600 centers, including long-term care facilities, community hospitals, walk-in clinics and health ministries to more than 60 cities throughout Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana, Georgia, and New Mexico.
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?
Infor CloudSuite Healthcare will modernize an IT foundation comprised of disparate systems that constrain the organization’s ability to adapt quickly to changing conditions, including CHRISTUS’ considerable growth. As a cloud-based solution, it provides critical business continuity, and massive computing power to manage the organization’s vast network of health ministries across the Americas.
George Conklin, CHRISTUS Health’s Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer, said the decision to select Infor was because of the organization’s understanding of CHRISTUS Health’s Mission and shared vision for how technology can enable better patient care.
“While our mission and values are rooted deep in tradition, CHRISTUS always has an eye toward the future; we constantly strive for innovation, and seek new ways to deliver services to our patients and communities,” said Conklin. “Transforming our organization for the digital era is a significant undertaking, but with Infor CloudSuite Healthcare as the backbone of our IT infrastructure, CHRISTUS will not only reap short-term benefits such as increased efficiency and reduced operating costs, but also set the foundation for the future, utilizing insights and analytics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence to improve patient services and outcomes.”
Read More: Interview With Kalin Stoyanchev, Head Of Blockchain + RNDR Project Lead
Pam Murphy
Infor, headquartered in New York City, is one of the world’s largest providers of enterprise software and services. Pam Murphy, Infor’s Chief Operating Officer, is the Infor Executive Sponsor and helped kick-off the project last week.
“Digital technologies are having an impact on every industry sector, but perhaps none more than healthcare,” said Murphy. “CHRISTUS is a visionary organization with an ingenious leadership team; the digital foundation that Infor CloudSuite Healthcare provides will help enable their inspired vision for the future of healthcare to become a reality.”


