[24]7 AI-Powered Virtual Agent Now Available For Both Speech And Digital Channels

16 Aug 2017

Solution empowers enterprises to build once and deploy anywhere, to provide an effortless self-service experience at all customer touchpoints
– [24]7, a global leader in intent-driven customer experience solutions, announced the availability of [24]7 AIVA, an AI-powered Virtual Agent that empowers enterprises to build once and deploy across any self-service channel. Built on [24]7’s common technology platform for both self-service and assisted channels, [24]7 AIVA enables companies to better anticipate and act on consumer intent across channels, in order to provide a more personalized, predictive and effortless customer experience.
Customer journeys take place across both voice and digital channels and often include both self-service and assisted service. [24]7 uses artificial intelligence to break down the siloes between these channels, empowering businesses to deliver enhanced automation that results in faster resolution of consumer queries. With a common language and intent model across speech and digital channels, [24]7 AIVA can be built once and deployed anywhere, including web, IVR, messaging platforms (e.g. Apple Business Chat and Facebook Messenger), and SMS. This provides businesses with the unparalleled opportunity to meet their customers’ needs no matter how or when they choose to interact.
“We’ve designed AIVA to perform as well as a company’s best human agent,” said Scott Horn, chief marketing officer of [24]7. “With [24]7 AIVA, businesses can predict what customers are looking to do, and deliver the best resolution. Consumers can begin a conversation through self-service, and complete the transaction with a live chat agent who has context of the previous conversation. The ability to use channels interchangeably, pick up where they left off, and never have to start over, results in a superior customer experience.”
Smart Interactions Based on Understanding Consumer Intent
[24]7 AIVA enables intelligent, two-way interactions for both voice and text channels, and features the following capabilities:
Single Language and Intent Model Across Channels – Using the same language intent model across speech and digital channels means that all interactions draw from the same business logic, application logic and back-end integration capabilities with enterprise systems (e.g. CRM, billing systems). This empowers companies to re-imagine traditional IVR as AI-powered speech, and scale and automate digital interactions with Virtual Agent technology that is tightly integrated with chat.
Ability to Understand Vague Intents – Since humans often communicate in vague terms, the ability to understand consumer intent is critical. For example, when a consumer calls a phone company and says “I hate my phone,” AIVA can understand that the consumer is frustrated, and may be looking for a new device.
Predictive Modeling – [24]7’s intent prediction is based on 1.6 billion customer interactions, and 17 years of domain expertise. [24]7 identifies models of customer intent specific to each industry, which leads to faster interactions and much higher customer satisfaction that traditional methods.
Conversational Design – Using industry-leading Natural Language Understanding, [24]7 AIVA delivers superior speech recognition, built on Microsoft Deep Neural Network technology. This improves recognition of native speakers by two to four points, and for non-native English speakers by up to 26 percent over traditional natural language solutions.
Continuous Improvement – Using advanced machine learning techniques, AIVA continuously improves consumer interactions based on real-world voice and digital interactions. This results in the unique ability to learn over time, and emulate the practices of a company’s best human agent.
In addition to the general availability of [24]7 AIVA, the [24]7 Summer Release 2017 includes the following enhancements:
[24]7 Active Share – This “online canvas” enables phone agents to share visual experiences with voice callers. With this release, [24]7 Active Share now features the ability to detect web presence, meaning that voice agents can know when someone is online, and share information to the consumer’s desktop via a feature called Active Cards, without the need to send an invite. The Visual Content Composer tool makes it easy to build these Active Cards in minutes.
[24]7 Chat – [24]7 Chat uses intent-driven engagement and predictive analytics to enhance customer experience and improve agent effectiveness. With this release, [24]7 Chat is now tightly integrated with [24]7 AIVA. Additionally, a new Chat widget enables integration into any third-party desktop.


