QUOINE Launches Groundbreaking ICO Platform On QRYPTOS

07 May 2018

Global fintech company QUOINE today unveiled its Initial Coin Offering (ICO) platform, an all-in-one ICO execution service that provides a safe haven for both token participants and token issuers alike. QUOINE‘s ICO Mission Control will initially be integrated within the QRYPTOS exchange, before becoming part of the forthcoming LIQUID platform.
ICO Mission Control is an end-to-end solution designed to help blockchain project teams conduct an ICO in a flexible, secure, transparent and scalable manner, that adheres to best practices of KYC and AML.
QUOINE launches groundbreaking ICO platform on QRYPTOS
Just as the ICO disrupted IPOs, QUOINE‘s innovative ICO Mission Control platform will disrupt the way ICOs are being done today.
Read More: Meet The Women Using AI Technologies To Change The World
Mike Kayamori
Token projects can initiate an ICO on QUOINE‘s platform in just a few minutes and market participants can purchase tokens with instant settlement.
“Launching an ICO in the current climate requires a lot of caution on the part of token issuers,” said QUOINE Co-founder and CEO Mike Kayamori. “In the last 12 months, there have been a number of serious problems with ICOs, including leaks of email addresses and customer data, website hacks, phishing attempts, fake deposit addresses, and much more,” he added.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
“This has left token participants shaken and wary about participating in ICOs, while token issuers now have to go to great lengths in order to ensure their communities do not fall victim to scams. QUOINE’s ICO Mission Control removes these pain points so token issuers can focus on more productive aspects of their work, such as product development or marketing. With the launch of ICO Mission Control, we aim to bring global standards of security and technology to provide a safe, secure ICO launch for all token issuers and participants in the new crypto economy.”
QUOINE’s launch partner and the first ICO to be hosted on the platform will be VUULR, a global digital marketplace to buy and sell films and TV shows online using blockchain technology. The company is focused on building a complete infrastructure powered by blockchain technology. The VUULR ICO will begin May 9.
Ian McKee
“We are excited to be the first token issuer to launch an ICO on QUOINE’s ICO Mission Control. VUULR gets access to a huge base of crypto enthusiasts who can make full use of QUOINE’s secure and efficient platform,” said Ian McKee, CEO of VUULR.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
“VUULR’s ICO launch will allow the public to monetise their movie knowledge. Fans will be rewarded with VUU tokens when they contribute their knowledge about films and TV content to the VUULR platform,” he added.
Participation in ICOs on QUOINE’s platform will only be possible for those token participants who are signed up and KYC-verified on QRYPTOS. New buyers will be able to sign up on QRYPTOS in order to take part, with each token issuer alloted a dedicated ICO landing page to direct potential token participants.
QUOINE‘s Senior Vice President and Head of Operations Seth Melamed has been leading the project to develop ICO Mission Control.
“ICO Mission Control was really born from our experience of running our own QASH ICO in November 2017,” he said. “We learned first-hand the challenges of running a large scale ICO, including client onboarding, analytics, volatile cryptocurrency prices, understanding how to most effectively reach participants. From our own ICO experience, we decided to build a platform that solves the problems we faced and provide a tool for blockchain projects around the globe,” he added.
“One of the biggest challenges with any ICO is getting people signed up and KYC verified. From a buyer’s perspective, it’s annoying and a waste of time having to sign up every single time you want to take part in a token sale. QUOINE has industrialized the process of performing KYC. With the ICO Mission Control platform we are helping token project teams to focus on their blockchain innovation project instead of checking passports,” he said.


