DataRobot Launches Global Partner Program To Power AI-Driven Business Initiatives

05 Apr 2018

Best-of-Breed Technology and Services Accelerate Adoption of Automated Machine Learning in the Enterprise
DataRobot, the pioneer in automated machine learning, announced today the launch of the DataRobot AI Partner Program, a global initiative to support and enable select partners to accelerate an AI-driven transformation for their customers. This initiative is part of DataRobot’s commitment to building a world-class ecosystem of reseller and consultative partners who offer best-of-breed technologies and world-class support. The AI Partner Program already features leaders such as Cleartelligence, MIP, and Teknion.
Global #AI Partner Program launched by @DataRobot to enable the AI-driven #enterprise
AI and machine learning are driving a competitive advantage for industry leaders, but many companies don’t have the expertise or resources to create predictive models that extract business value from their data. DataRobot works closely with companies in its AI Partner Program to make machine learning more accessible to a broader set of users who don’t have a data science background – such as business analysts and executives. These users can utilize DataRobot to quickly develop and deploy machine learning models to make more accurate predictions and uncover hidden insights, all in a matter of minutes or hours, rather than weeks or months.
Fabrice Ciais
“Automated machine learning allows us to bring greater efficiency and scale to bear as we address the increasingly sophisticated analytical needs of our clients,” said Fabrice Ciais, Advanced Analytics lead, PwC U.K. “This is particularly helpful for organizations at the early stage of their analytics journey who have ambitions to scale-up quickly. It really shows its value when a large number of models need to run in parallel (e.g., for model validation), or when speed and precision are key drivers of competitive advantage in the marketplace.”
Seann Gardiner
The AI Partner Program is aimed at value added resellers and global and regional analytics consulting firms who have a strong understanding of data analytics and data science, as well as domain expertise within certain industries such as financial services, manufacturing, healthcare, and government or functional domains such as supply chain, marketing, and finance. Having this underpinning of analytics experience better enables partners to develop advanced machine learning and AI expertise with DataRobot’s help in order to drive value for customers who are just starting with, or struggling to implement, machine learning and AI.
“We created our AI Partner Program to enable top-notch partners in the analytics space to offer DataRobot’s automated machine learning platform, as well as advanced education and professional services,” said Seann Gardiner, EVP of Business Development, DataRobot. “By working with world-class resellers and consultants, we are expanding and accelerating our ability to fulfill our mission of enabling the AI-driven enterprise.”


