KINTEX Presents Korea’s Largest Conventions In Future Technology, ‘RoboUniverse & K Drone’ And ‘VR Summit’, In June

14 Mar 2018

Reflecting Global Shifts, The Main Focuses Of 2018 RoboUniverse Conference & Expo Will Be On Service Robot Technology And Public Sector Market Entering
RoboUniverse & K Drone (RoboUniverse) and VR Summit return to Seoul for the fourth consecutive year. The business to business (B2B) exhibition and conference hosted by Rising Media Inc. and 3DR Holdings, in association with Korea International Exhibition Center (KINTEX), showcases the latest core technologies in Industry 4.0 from June 28 (Thu) to 30 (Sat) at KINTEX, Halls 7 and 8.
The two events are concurrently held with Inside 3D Printing and Technoscape Asia to form a combined mega-event during KINTEX’s “Technology Week” in late June of every year. The Seoul event is part of the world’s first traveling convention in the respective fields and is at the forefront of Korean service robot, IoT, drones/UAV, AI, VR/AR/MR, and future technologies. The salient theme of the International Consumer Electronics Show (CES) held in Las Vegas earlier this year was IoT and AI, where most of the exhibits were infused with the technology in one way or another. Dubbed the “Korean CES,” RoboUniverse & VR Summit promises to show visitors the latest development trends of the high-speed internet and technology-driven nation.
By visiting the exhibition hall and attending the international conference, attendees of RoboUniverse may expect to find various applications and development trends of service robots and Unmanned Technology in such fields as social, medical, military, (prevention of) disaster, agriculture, education, entertainment and so on.
For aging societies, which are commonly seen in developed countries for instance Japan, Germany, and the United States, it has become easier to find robots replacing humans in industries such as hospitality, leisure, life style, and the silver industry in order to reduce the cost of human labor. Reflecting these global shifts, the main focuses of 2018 RoboUniverse Conference & Expo will be on service robot technology and public sector market entering.
In VR Summit, not only will visitors be able to see and experience cutting edge technology equipment, attractions, creative contents, adult contents, and various applications such as psychological treatment, gaming, and architecture, entrepreneurs in the fields of VR/AR/MR/CR struggling to make profit may gain insight by attending the 2 day conference with 25 sessions on topics ranging from “Entering the Chinese Market” to “Silicon Valley Investment.”
Global Sensor Forum, which successfully launched last year will return this year and expand on its exhibition of various sensors, which is an essential technology in robots and VR. KINTEX will newly launch Technoscape Asia in which the main focuses are on Cloud Computing, Big Data, Super/Quantum Computing, and Cyber Security.
“Korea has one of the most outstanding ICT and IoT infrastructure in the world; on that firm foundation Korea has rapidly developed and has become a powerhouse in the digital industry. Korean companies are especially appealing to investors and buyers from countries like the U.S., the United Kingdom, and Germany. This is the reason why the Korea event is the most successful one among our other events,” said the Asia Pacific Managing Director of RisingMedia.


