Kaufman Hall’s Peak Software Adds Powerful Physician Attribution And Performance Reporting Capabilities

10 Oct 2017

Clinical Performance Solution Aims to Help Healthcare Providers Accelerate Progress in Tackling Issues Like Unwarranted Care Variation
 Kaufman Hall, a leading provider of management consulting services, and enterprise performance management and decision support software, announced today the availability of advanced Physician Attribution and Performance Reporting capabilities within its Peak Software solution. The new capabilities meet a pressing industry need for more robust data and analytics to help hospitals and health systems identify clinical performance opportunities, and drive accountability in addressing them.
Together, the new features improve data accuracy and accessibility – two challenges that are preventing healthcare providers from making greater progress in tackling issues, like unwarranted clinical variation, that have a major impact on the quality and cost of care. According to the Kaufman Hall report, 2017 State of Cost Transformation in U.S. Hospitals: An Urgent Call to Accelerate Action, fewer than 40 percent of hospitals and health systems are addressing unwarranted clinical variation or clinical effectiveness as part of their organization’s current performance improvement efforts.
Jennie Dulac
“Many hospitals currently assign a primary physician to the patient’s record at the time of discharge,” says Jennie Dulac, RN, Vice President of Clinical Solutions at Kaufman Hall and head of the Peak Software unit. “This may be inaccurate for evaluating quality of care and physician performance. There is a need to have an effective, efficient methodology for assigning a primary physician to each patient encounter. We have developed an algorithm that does just that and changes the game on how clinical performance can be managed.”
Using Peak’s powerful Physician Attribution algorithm, the Primary Physician is identified as the doctor who made the largest overall contribution to the clinical outcome of the case. The technology-enabled solution is easy to use, accurate, transparent, and consistent with best practices.
Data accessibility is also addressed as Peak’s Physician Performance Reporting capabilities allow for the creation of individual physician and physician group-based reports reflecting Patient Safety, Quality, Patient Satisfaction, Utilization, and Costs, in addition to other specific measures. Custom physician reports can be created, distributed and viewed within the Peak application. Extensive and user-customizable workflow features allow for the scheduling, routing, annotation and electronic signature of Physician Performance Reports.
Physicians with Peak access can also utilize Dynamic Physician Scorecards, which are interactive dashboards that allow drilling down for more detailed information and can be set up to mimic the information provided on their performance reports.
“We work with organizations to create their standard measures, customize their reports, and distribute them in a way that allows organizations to track and trend not just the data but also who’s annotated the report and signed off on the report,” says Dulac. “We mimic the chain of accountability for each organization. Once everything is set up, driving performance transparency and accountability is a single-click process.”


