Artesian Solutions Appoints Max Firth To Its Board Of Directors

23 Apr 2018

Max Firth Has Vast Expertise in Delivering Data Solutions for Businesses Spanning All Segments from Leading Banks, Telcos, and Utilities to SME’s
Leading AI-powered business intelligence service, Artesian Solutions, announces the appointment of Max Firth as a Non-Executive Director, as it moves to strengthen its offering in the risk and compliance market.
Max joins Artesian’s board from Experian. A veteran of risk and compliance and highly sought-after industry thought leader, Max has held senior positions at Experian and PH Group for over 20 years, most recently as Managing Director of Business Information Services at Experian. During this time he maintained ownership of $100+ Million P&L and was instrumental in leading the business from decline to growth via a global programme of diversification and business transformation initiatives.
Max Firth has vast expertise in delivering data solutions for businesses spanning all segments from leading banks, telcos and utilities to SME’s, with a deep understanding of compliance and regulatory requirements in customer-centric environments.
At the time of this announcement, Andrew Yates, CEO of Artesian said, “I am delighted that Max is joining the Artesian Board.  His significant and senior expertise will stand us in good stead as we extend our capabilities into the domain of risk and compliance to drive enhanced value for our customers in the regulated industry space.  I look forward to working with Max as we progress to the next stage of our evolution, and feel confident that his expertise will be crucial in enhancing our position and growing our presence in the competitive business intelligence market.”
Artesian continually scans millions of online sources for data on markets, organizations, individuals, and topics, and uses sophisticated algorithms to filter and transform that information into commercially valuable insights.
Max Firth said, “Artesian has established itself as a true innovator in the delivery of data and insight, moving into the risk and compliance space is a logical next step. Artesian continually disrupts the market by taking a visionary approach, investing in R&D programmes that accelerate the use of AI technologies in commercial environments, adapting and responding quickly to opportunities – this sets them apart and creates a further competitive advantage. I am excited to have the opportunity to help the team accelerate momentum and achieve their strategic growth objectives.”
Currently, Artesian is a powerful AI-driven service that equips client facing teams with the resources they need to succeed in a modern commercial environment. Artesian provides the data, real-time insight and context needed to find customers, create meaningful engagements, sell more and create long-lasting business relationships. With the use of AI technology layered on top of company information, data and news, Artesian helps you uncover opportunities, build relationships and accelerate deals.
With Artesian, marketers can track their customers, prospects, competitors, and partners; spot and capitalize on business opportunities, and manage risks in the pipeline. Moreover, Artesian helps drive customer alignment, credibility, competitiveness and client satisfaction.
<span style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" data-mce-type="bookmark" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span><span style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" data-mce-type="bookmark" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>


