Fortune To Convene Tech Leaders At The Fortune Global Tech Forum In Guangzhou, China, November 29-30

11 Jul 2018

The Fortune Global Tech Forum will take place in Guangzhou, China on November 29-30, 2018, it was announced today by Fortune President Alan Murray at a press conference in Guangzhou.  The two-day event, formerly known as Fortune Brainstorm Tech International, will bring together some of the most promising start-up companies and emerging tech stars in China and beyond
In addition, Fortune announced some of the most prominent leaders in the technology and innovation economy as speakers for this year’s event.  Early confirmed speakers for the forum include: Lee Kai-fu, founder of Sinovation Ventures; Neil Shen, founding managing partner of Sequoia Capital China;  Jessica Tan, group deputy CEO, group COO, and CIO of Ping An Insurance (Group) Company of China, Ltd.;  Hans Tung, managing partner of GGV Capital; Zeng Qinghong, chairman of Guangzhou Automobile Group; Kim Posnett, managing director and co-head, Internet Investment Banking, of Goldman Sachs;  Hu Weiwei, co-founder and CEO of Beijing Mobike Technology Co., Ltd.; Fred Hu, founding partner of Primavera Capital Group;  Brian Gu, vice chairman and CEO of Xpeng Motors,  Harriet Green, CEO and chairman of IBM Asia Pacific; Yi Wang, co-founder and CEO of Liulishuo (LingoChamp); and George Yip, Professor of Marketing and Strategy at Imperial College Business School. An additional lineup of speakers will be announced in the coming months.
Follow Us
This year’s theme, “Innovation in the Age of AI,”  will explore the innovation revolution unfolding in China and beyond, including China’s homegrown innovation and mass implementation in fields including artificial intelligence, social media, biotech, fintech, virtual reality, automotive, the sharing economy, and mobile platforms.
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
During the forum, Fortune will host its second-annual Fortune China Innovation Awards, recognizing outstanding Chinese startup companies, through a competition between high-potential start-ups in a variety of fields. The event will culminate in the naming of the Fortune China Innovation Company of the Year. Winners will receive car prizes, which will be supplied by Guangzhou Automobile Group.
Participation in the Fortune Global Tech Forum is by invitation only.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections
Partner sponsors for the Fortune Global Tech Forum include presenting partner Guangzhou Automobile Group, and partner sponsor Guangzhou Pharmaceutical Company.
FORTUNE is a global leader in business journalism with major franchises that include the FORTUNE 500 and the FORTUNE 100 Best Companies to Work For. The Global Tech Forum is one of the signature live events produced annually by Fortune Live Media, including Fortune Most Powerful Women, Fortune Global Forum, Fortune Brainstorm Tech and Fortune MPW Next Gen.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc


