Cybersecurity, AI And Blockchain To Take Center Stage At EMerge Americas 2018

15 Mar 2018

Xavier Gonzalez
eMerge Americas, the premier technology event connecting Latin America, North America and Europe, today announced a number of sessions that will get at the heart of the hottest trends being discussed across industries: cybersecurity, AI and blockchain. Speakers include Andy Ellis, Chief Security Officer, Akamai; Sophia the Robot; César Cernuda, President, LatAm, Microsoft; Manny Medina, CEO, Cyxtera Technologies; and Jackie Hyland, Director, LatAm, Silicon Valley Bank.
“We have gathered some of the brightest minds in innovation to share how they are solving the world’s most pressing business issues,” said Xavier Gonzalez, CEO of eMerge Americas. “We are proud to connect startups, entrepreneurs, VCs, major businesses and government officials for an unparalleled opportunity to stand shoulder to shoulder with these visionary leaders and build powerful partnerships without borders.”
CYBERSECURITY SESSIONS:
Redesigning Security
Andy Ellis, Chief Security Officer, Akamai
2:30 – 3:00 p.m. – Monday – eMerge Main Stage
Network Breaches
John Ackerly, Co-Founder and CEO, Virtru
Will Ackerly, Co-Founder and CEO, Virtru
3:15 – 3:45 p.m. – Monday – eMerge Main Stage
Keynote: Digital Enterprise
Manny Medina, CEO, Cyxtera Technologies
4:50 – 5:30 p.m. – Monday – eMerge Main Stage
AI SESSIONS:
Keynote Fireside Chat: Artificial Intelligence: Unleashing New Opportunities Across Latin America
César Cernuda, President, LatAm, Microsoft
Emiliano Abramzon, CEO, Satellogic
11:35 – 12:05 p.m. – Monday – eMerge Main Stage
Keynote: Sophia the Robot
9:10 – 9:50 a.m. – Tuesday – eMerge Main Stage
BLOCKCHAIN SESSIONS:
Financial Inclusion: Unlocking Blockchain for the Underbanked
Jackie Hyland, Director, LatAm, Silicon Valley Bank
12:05 – 12:25 p.m. – Tuesday – eMerge Main Stage
Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Capital Raising Continues
Emma Channing, CEO, Satis Group + Manny Medina, CEO, Cyxtera + Angela Dalton, Managing Director, TMT Sector Head, Guggenheim Partners (Moderator)
2:30 – 3:00 p.m. – Tuesday –  WIT Stage
MESSAGES FROM THE MINES: AN INTERACTIVE INSTALLATION
New this year, attendees will have the opportunity to interact with a unique art installation. Messages from the Minesexcavates and analyzes messages left in the Bitcoin blockchain by miners, and in doing so helps to disambiguate some of the misunderstood aspects of this new technology. These messages, left inside the blocks of the blockchain, are a form of digital graffiti, unique—though overlooked—cultural artifacts forever embedded in one of the most contemporary digital technologies.


