Aktana Announces New Product Integrations With Salesforce For The Life Sciences Industry

13 Jul 2018

Integrations with Salesforce Sales Cloud, Marketing Cloud, and Einstein AI Apply Aktana’s Decision Support Expertise to Drive Intelligent Multichannel Engagement with Healthcare Professionals
Aktana, a pioneer in decision support for global life science companies, today announced new product integrations with Salesforce Sales Cloud, Marketing Cloud, and Einstein AI. The native integrations embed decision support in sales and marketing teams’ workflows to drive smarter multichannel engagement. That decision support takes the form of data-driven suggestions and insights that inform smarter actions and improve customer engagement with healthcare professionals (HCPs) across channels. Two of the top ten global life science companies are already benefiting from the new integrations.
Mike Luessi
“Aktana has proven experience delivering decision support and machine learning to the life sciences industry,” said Mike Luessi, RVP, Healthcare and Life Sciences at Salesforce. “Through this collaboration, we expand the value of our platforms to enable sales and marketing teams to align around the customer journey.”
“The go-to-market model in life sciences has evolved from one that is highly scheduled and push-oriented to a dynamic exchange between companies and the physicians they serve,” said James Wong, vice president of product management at Aktana. “With Salesforce, we equip commercial teams with the tools and knowledge to respond to the ever-changing needs of the customer, and to do so in an efficient, coordinated fashion.”
Read More: The Promise and Potential of AI for the Insurance Industry
Aktana and Marketing Cloud Enable Multichannel Marketing

Marketers can incorporate Aktana decision support as part of the multichannel customer journeys they build within Marketing Cloud. By providing relevant context to generate critical suggestions and insights, marketers can empower field actions to align with their brand strategy as intended. Marketers can also set field activity, or inactivity, to trigger customer journeys within Marketing Cloud, incorporating known preferences to personalize the customer experience.
Aktana Embeds Decision Support in Sales Cloud for Medical Device Companies

Aktana has enhanced its existing Sales Cloud integration by now offering decision support tailored specifically for medical device companies. With Aktana’s data-driven suggestions and insights, companies can more easily deploy and monitor account-based selling strategies, encourage cross-team coordination, and set actions to meet maintenance contract obligations. Sales representatives can access critical information and recommended next actions to more effectively engage with customers — without having to leave Sales Cloud.
Read More: AI Breakthrough Announces Inaugural Award Winners
Aktana and Einstein Deliver AI-Powered Predictions for Life Sciences

Aktana has spent the last seven years focused exclusively on the use cases of the life sciences industry. This deep expertise combines with Einstein AI’s highly customizable platform to enable more contextual predictions specific to the life sciences market, such as likelihood of significant script change, based on training data and target models pre-configured by Aktana. The integration results in smarter decision support to recommend specific actions and messaging directly in Sales Cloud.
“Sales and marketing teams value new technology most when it leverages existing tools and workflows,” said James Wong. “By integrating with Salesforce, we empower commercial teams with intelligent insight directly in the user experience many already rely upon so heavily.”
Read More: Insurtech: the new AI disruption is hitting insurance


