Daneel, A Smart Assistant For Cryptocurrency Investors, Officially Launches

22 Jan 2018

Daneel Will Assist Non-Professional Audiences, Including Beginners, Intermediate Users, And Experienced Persons In The Cryptocurrency Sector
Daneel Assistant Company, a technology-based startup that focuses on developing Artificial Intelligence (AI) for cryptocurrency investors, announced a prototype of their smart assistant, Daneel will soon be released.
As intelligent personal assistant modeled after Watson, the most powerful AI in the fields of natural language and emotional analysis today, Daneel will assist non-professional audiences, including beginners, intermediate users, and experienced persons in the cryptocurrency sector.
Joseph Bedminster
“We’re bringing data intelligence into the crypto jungle, which everyone can agree, is incredibly confusing,” said Joseph Bedminster, CEO of Daneel Assistant Company. “The cryptocurrency market is growing at an exponential pace, reaching a capitalization value of $640 billion just last month. For everyone wanting to keep up with the growth, we’ve created a smart assistant that will make it much easier.”
Daneel addresses the flood of oriented and unreliable information swirling around cryptocurrency investments today. The platform can assist beginners by explaining the basics through educational materials; intermediates by improving knowledge, providing simple KPIs, and synthesizing accurate news on the currencies owned; and experts with straight-to-the-point UX support, quantitative dashboards, trending news and warm signals, and synthesized positions.
In total, Daneel provides real-time marketing analysis, quantification, and improvement of reliability of financial information thanks to Watson. Additionally, the smart assistant analyzes the emotions of the market using its “Social Emotion Indicator.” All of this can be accessed from the one, consolidated Daneel mobile application.
“Since cryptocurrency is still wholly misunderstood, yet media personnel know it’s a hot topic, we’re seeing an enormous amount of factually inaccurate articles swirling around the Internet right now,” said Bedminster. “Our goal is to deliver strong and reliable cryptocurrency and blockchain market information by democratizing the access to AI. Spread the word on the official release of our Daneel app.”
Daneel will be based on its own cryptocurrency: the DAN token. A maximum of 100 million DAN tokens will be produced. All unsold tokens will be burned after the Initial Coin Offering in order to preserve its value.
The ICO will officially take place on January 29, 2018.


