SparkCognition Named One Of The “Best Entrepreneurial Companies In America” By Entrepreneur Magazine’s 2017 Entrepreneur 360™ List

30 Dec 2017

AI leader, SparkCognition, recognized with Entrepreneur Magazine Distinction
SparkCognition was recently recognized as one of the “Best Entrepreneurial Companies in America” by Entrepreneur magazine’s Entrepreneur 360™ List, a premier study delivering the most comprehensive analysis of private companies in America. Based on this study forged by Entrepreneur, SparkCognition is recognized as a well-rounded company that has mastered a balance of impact, innovation, growth, and leadership.
Amir Husain
“The SparkCognition family is proud to be recognized on the Entrepreneur 360 List as one of the top private companies in the nation,” said Amir Husain, SparkCognition’s President and CEO. “This award encompasses SparkCognition’s dedicated efforts to making a significant impact in AI and showcases the company’s continuous growth and expansion.”
Based in Austin, TX, SparkCognition has grown exponentially since its founding, becoming a global leader in the field of AI. Recently named to CB Insights AI 100  for the second year in a row, SparkCognition has distinguished itself as a highly-promising and renowned AI company. The company deploys AI technologies to help enterprise customers optimize business operations and secure data on a variety of critical assets.
“Our annual evaluation is a 360-degree analysis of top privately-held companies representing and serving a variety of industries,” explains Lisa Murray, Chief Insights Officer of Entrepreneur Media, Inc. “These businesses are real-world case studies for any entrepreneur who seeks to master the four pillars that can greatly impact the longevity and growth of their businesses. With the Entrepreneur 360, success is measured by achieving balance throughout the entire organization, predicated by revenue.”
Honorees were identified based on the results from a comprehensive study of independently- owned companies, using a proprietary algorithm and other advanced analytics. The algorithm was built on a balanced scorecard designed to measure four metrics reflecting major pillars of entrepreneurship—innovation, growth, leadership, and impact.


