Telit Blankets Japanese Mobile Market With SoftBank Certification

08 May 2018

Completes The Certification Of Telit’s Data Card With The Third Telecommunications Carrier In Japan
Telit, a global enabler of the Internet of Things (IoT), today announced that its LN940A9 data card has completed SoftBank certification. This certification represents all three major carriers in Japan. For more on Telit’s LN94x series modules, visit http://info.telit.com/ln940-data-card.
“We’re thrilled to complete certification at SoftBank as it’s important to us that all Telit customers in Japan have the necessary modules to enable advanced IoT applications,” said Derick Tsang, Telit’s SVP of Sales for APAC.  “Japan is a key market with innovation happening in the IoT marketplace.  We are now blanketing the country by way of working with the three major carriers helping to accelerate the advancements that are ultimately enabling the digital transformation era.”
LN94x mobile broadband data cards are industrial-grade M.2 form factor designed for easy integration into networking, industrial IoT device platforms and mobile computing, that command a smaller and thinner footprint.  The family of compact modules are uniquely designed to combine critical features with enhancements such as adaptive clocking, selective suspend, link power management, dynamic power reduction, and tunable antenna enablement that together deliver the most streamlined, reliable user experience possible. 
Telit is a global leader in Internet of Things (IoT) enablement, with an extensive portfolio of wireless connectivity modules, platforms, virtual cellular IoT operator services, and professional services, empowering hundreds of millions of connected ‘things’ to date, and trusted by thousands of direct and indirect customers, globally.  With nearly two decades of IoT innovation experience, Telit continues to redefine the boundaries of digital business, by delivering secure, integrated end-to-end IoT solutions for many of the world’s largest brands, including enterprises, OEMs, system integrators and service providers across all industries, enabling their pursuit of enterprise digital transformation.
Read More: SkyRunner Illuminates Flying Car Potential For Military Applications


