Yext Launches Conversational UI In Winter ’18 Release

19 Jan 2018

The Winter ’18 Product Release Includes the Yext Knowledge Assistant, New Support for ATMs, Kiosks and Other Specialized Business Entities, Yext’s WeChat Integration, and New Competitive Intelligence and Sentiment Analysis Tools
Yext, the leader in Digital Knowledge Management, announced early access for its Winter ‘18 Product Release. Packed with powerful, next-generation updates, the Winter ’18 Release offers Yext users an entirely new way to update their digital knowledge, deep insights to help them make informed decisions, and more.
Howard Lerman
“We are witnessing a major platform shift fueled by the rise of intelligence. As services strive to give you a more thoughtful, direct answer, they need more knowledge about your business,” said Howard Lerman, Yext Founder and CEO. “Today’s launch is about giving businesses new ways to control their essential digital knowledge, in more places, and across more types of entities.”
With the new Yext Knowledge Assistant, updating Yext is now as easy as texting a friend. First unveiled onstage at ONWARD 17, the Knowledge Assistant is a breakthrough conversational UI that allows Yext users to update the public data about their businesses. Businesses can use Facebook Messenger or SMS text messaging to make crucial updates to the Yext Knowledge Manager — like uploading a photo, changing store hours, or responding to reviews — in real time, without needing to log in or install an app. The Knowledge Assistant is smart, and can even text the user to remind them of an upcoming holiday that might warrant a change in store hours, so customers don’t show up to a closed storefront.
Marc Ferrentino
“Digital knowledge is changing constantly, so to unlock its full power, businesses need a way for their teams to easily and conveniently update their knowledge,” said Marc Ferrentino, Chief Strategy Officer at Yext. “The Knowledge Assistant lets you simply text Yext updates using a smart, conversational interface, and will fundamentally improve a business’s ability to manage its digital knowledge.”


