RTI CEO To Deliver Keynote Address At Third Annual IoT Global Innovation Forum

10 Jul 2018

Dr. Stan Schneider to Address How Autonomy is the Biggest Driver of the Industrial IoT
Real-Time Innovations (RTI), the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) connectivity company, today announced that Chief Executive Officer, Dr. Stan Schneider, will be delivering the keynote session, “Accelerating Autonomy” at the third annual IoT Global Innovation Forum on Wednesday, July 11.
Schneider will deliver the conference’s opening keynote session at 8:00 a.m. PT, where he will define key terms and application categories of the IIoT. During his session, he will focus on common drivers of the most exciting autonomy applications, drawing on real examples from smart medicine, renewable energy and autonomous cars. He will also discuss the economic impact of the IIoT on employment and industry.
Read More: AI Breakthrough Announces Inaugural Award Winners
The 3rd IoT Global Innovation Forum will bring together leading innovators, business executives and industry professionals to explore the latest advances and applications for commercial and industrial end users across sectors within the emerging IoT ecosphere.
Through a series of keynote and plenary sessions, interactive panel discussions and breakout workshop sessions, industry leaders will help forum attendees envision and implement the full potential of IoT in both consumer and industrial sectors. Additional topics discussed will include: intelligent transportation, emerging smart building and smart city applications, medical and health care systems, smart grid and industrial applications, IoT interoperability and integration and more.
Read More: Insurtech: the new AI disruption is hitting insurance
Additional details on the event can be found below.
Event Details
What: IoT Global Innovation Forum 2018
When: Opening Keynote Session, Wednesday, July 11, 2018 at 8:00 a.m. PT
Where: World Trade Center, 25 SW Salmon Street, Two World Trade Center, Portland, OR 97204
Read More: Interview with Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder and CEO, Bespoke Inc


