World Economic Forum Announces Technology Pioneers 2018 That Will Change The World

21 Jun 2018

WINNERS TO WATCH: Companies Were Selected For Their Potential To “Transform Society And Industry” And “Shape The Fourth Industrial Revolution,” Fulvia Montresor of the World Economic Forum Said
The World Economic Forum’s Technology Pioneers community are early-stage companies from around the world that are involved in the design, development and deployment of new technologies and innovations, and are poised to have a significant impact on business and society.
This year’s cohort is the most diverse ever, both geographically and in terms of gender. 25% are female-led, and a majority (54%) come from regions outside the United States and Silicon Valley, with each continent represented, barring Antarctica. There is also a wide variety in the technologies the pioneers focus on: the focus technologies include artificial intelligence, big data and internet of things (IoT), biotechnology, blockchain, autonomous vehicles, cybersecurity, vertical farming and other agricultural advances, decentralized microgrids and robotics.
The Technology Pioneers were selected by a selection committee of more than 60 academics, entrepreneurs, venture capitalists and corporate executives. The committee based its decisions on criteria including innovation, potential impact and leadership. Past recipients include Airbnb, Google, Kickstarter, Mozilla, Palantir Technologies, Spotify, TransferWise, Twitter and Wikimedia.
Read More: Interview With Seamus Abshere, Co-Founder And CTO, Faraday
Here are the winners worth keeping an eye on:
CUJO AI is the leading artificial intelligence company providing network operators AI-driven solutions, including AI security, advanced device identification, advanced parental controls, and network analytics. CUJO AI Platform creates intuitive end-user facing applications for LAN and wireless (mobile and public wifi). Each solution can be implemented as a white-label offering. CUJO AI was recently listed as a “Vendor to Watch” and a “Cool Vendor in IoT security” by research company Gartner. In May 2018, the company has closed a strategic Series B round, led by Charter Communications, valuing the company in access of $100M.
XM Cyber, founded by top executives from Israel’s cyber intelligence community and provider of the first fully automated APT (Advanced Persistent Threat) simulation and remediation platform, today announced that it was selected among hundreds of candidates to be recognized as one of the World Economic Forum’s “Technology Pioneers”. The Technology Pioneers community consists of early-stage companies from around the world that are involved in the design, development and deployment of new technologies and innovations, and are poised to have a significant impact on business and society.
Applied Brain Research Inc. (ABR), is a Canadian company that produces a suite of neuromorphic AI software tools and applications enabling developers to rapidly build AI systems that run on all major computing platforms, including the emerging class of neuromorphic computer chips, which were designed based on the human brain, such as Intel’s Loihi research chip. Neuromorphic applications built with Nengo use less power to compute AI networks than CPUs or GPUs, especially for advanced, highly recurrent, leading-edge AI networks. On the way to ABR’s long-range goal to deliver the first truly functional service robot control system, ABR has used Nengo to build Reach, the world’s first neuromorphic adaptive robotic reaching system, and Spaun, the world’s largest functional brain simulation.
ABR was selected among hundreds of candidates as one of the World Economic Forum’s “technology pioneers”. Applied Brain Research Inc. was spun-out of the Centre for Theoretical Neuroscience (CTN) at the University of Waterloo. Dr. Chris Eliasmith, Chief Science Officer and co-CEO of ABR, studies the functioning of the human brain at the CTN. Using Nengo, Dr. Eliasmith and his team created Spaun, the world’s largest functional human brain simulation, composed of over 6 million spiking neurons that perform twelve cognitive tasks, including learning to follow arbitrary instruction sequences.
Read More: Global Blockchain Summit Addresses Diversity With ‘Women In Blockchain’ Panel
Aqua Security, the market-leading platform provider for securing container-based and cloud-native applications, today announced it was selected among hundreds of candidates as one of the World Economic Forum’s “technology pioneers”.  Aqua Security in 2016 launched its cloud-native security platform that provides full visibility and control over containerized environments, at enterprise scale.
Narrativ is a media technology company building a better internet for journalism and commerce. Our award-winning SmartLink technology is transforming content and democratizing access to a $60B pipeline. With more than one billion links rewired, Narrativ partners include Ulta Beauty, Dermstore, and New York Magazine.
CognitiveScale builds augmented intelligence software that solves complex business problems at scale for financial services, healthcare, and digital commerce markets. Built on its Cortex 5 augmented intelligence platform, the company’s software helps enterprises apply AI and blockchain technology to increase user engagement, improve decision-making, and deploy self-learning and self-assuring business processes.
Read More: Women In Blockchain; The Who-To-Follow Guide


