Verasity And TRUTH Agency Wage War On Digital Ad-Fraud

10 Jul 2018

Blockchain technology provides the latest weapon in the fight against online ad-fraud 
Verasity, a next-generation video platform enhanced with blockchain technology has partnered with TRUTH, a new media agency, to tackle ad-fraud.
David Orman
Verasity’s proprietary, patent-pending, Proof-of-View (POV™) technology prevents fake video views, eradicates bot interference, and reduces fraudulent activity wholesale across its video platform.
“Working with TRUTH, we’re going to provide advertisers with a far greater return on investment. Blockchain technology is already proving to be a total game changer for the way advertising is bought and sold across digital platforms,” said David Orman, Verasity Co-founder.
Read More: Interview with Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder and CEO, Bespoke Inc
Mary Keane Dawson
TRUTH’s blockchain technology ensures advertising can be traded and delivered with accountability. “Clearly Verasity’s Proof-of-View blockchain technology has a total affinity with our mantra here at TRUTH; to provide advertisers with fraudulent free media investment. By working with Verasity, we can provide our clients access to an accountable and 100% transparent media platform,” said Mary Keane Dawson, TRUTH‘s Founder and CEO.
Read More: The Promise and Potential of AI for the Insurance Industry
Why does this matter to your readers?
–  By 2021, 82% of all consumer internet traffic will be from video content. A market with an annual value of c.$312B. Streaming media is set for the largest increase in video ad-spend over the next five years.
–  Juniper Research estimates that advertisers will lose $19 billion in 2018 due to ad-fraud. Fraudsters are also ramping up their efforts. According to Pixalate, 20% of programmatically sold OTT ads in October 2017 were measured as suspect
–  The utilisation of transparent and immutable blockchain technology directly eradicates bot traffic and therefore ad-fraud.
–  Multinational companies such as Procter &amp; Gamble, Unilever and the Royal Bank of Scotland are bringing marketing in-house as they are becoming more distrustful of external media buying.
Mary Keane Dawson will be talking about the impact of blockchain on the advertising industry at CryptoBlockCon New York, 14-15 August, IBC 2018 13-15 September, and CryptoBlockCon London 24 September.
Read More: Millennial Parents Feel More Secured about AI Babysitting their Generation Alpha Kids!


