Tigerpaw One Now Integrates With Esticom Takeoff And Estimating Software

12 Jul 2018

By combining these two platforms, technology service providers can close more sales and provide better service to their customers by automating takeoff and estimating of technology and related construction projects
Tigerpaw One, a complete end-to-end business automation platform for technology service providers, now integrates with Esticom takeoff and estimating construction software.  As technology service providers continue to expand their services to generate new and recurring revenue streams, the collaboration between Tigerpaw Software and Esticom empowers mutual users with a combination of two beneficial platforms to quote structured cabling and associated construction work many telecom, MSP, audio-visual and security installers now offer.
Already a feature-rich software solution that boasts award-winning CRM, inventory, project management and quote and proposal features, Tigerpaw One offers yet another feature to streamline business operations. With the integration of Esticom, Tigerpaw One users now have a more efficient way to conduct on-screen takeoff and estimating of complex cabling and construction projects for the creation of proposals and quotes using their existing labor, material and customer databases.
Before this integration, project estimators needed to print construction plans and manually perform material takeoff procedures. Now, mutual subscribers of Tigerpaw One and Esticom can easily pull key customer data from Tigerpaw’s robust contact management, inventory management and price book features into Esticom.
Follow Us
Once the data is in Esticom, the estimator combines it with takeoff data to create a thorough and accurate parts and labor estimate within a digitized blueprint. The estimate is then transmitted back into Tigerpaw to create a customized quote or proposal. Once approved by the customer, the quote is converted to a service order or project in Tigerpaw, and each line item is combined into a purchase order and tracked within Tigerpaw’s inventory management tool before setting up tasks, billing and processing payment.
Exchanging information between the two platforms is easy and seamless. Technology service personnel simply sign-in to Esticom online and make the connection to Tigerpaw One on their desktop or notebook computer. In addition to speeding up the process, this collaborative solution eliminates duplicate order entry and reduces many of the manual tasks associated with estimating low voltage construction projects.
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
Chris Lee
“As a former low voltage estimator, one of our biggest pain points was the amount of time it took to print large sets of plans, perform a takeoff and then manually move that data back into several disparate systems for quoting, project management and accounting,” says Chris Lee, co-founder of Esticom. “The integration of Esticom with Tigerpaw removes these steps from the equation, improving speed, productivity, accuracy and reducing the overhead costs associated with these manual processes.“
Over the past two years, Tigerpaw has expanded its API to accommodate integrations with industry-leading partners like Esticom.
Read More: How “System Mindfulness” Is Changing The FMCG Industry
James Foxall
“By tying our powerful all-in-one business management solution with a cutting-edge visual estimating platform like Esticom, we are able to empower end users to manage complex projects from start to finish faster and with greater cost control,” says Tigerpaw President & CEO James Foxall. “We believe end users will find that the functionality to estimate parts and labor on a blueprint within Esticom is an efficient complement to the quoting and price book features, as well as the award-winning inventory and project management tools within Tigerpaw. We are grateful to Esticom for working with us to offer a genuine value-add integration.”
Available now, Esticom for Tigerpaw is easy to try and easy to buy. A Software as a Service (SaaS) application, there are no upfront implementation or hardware costs and low monthly tiers for companies of all sizes. Subscribers may sign up or cancel at any time. Before purchasing a subscription, interested users may register at Esticom.com for a full-featured, 14-day free trial and setup takes less than five minutes. Esticom provides free pre- and post-sales support to help with integration to the Tigerpaw system.
Read More: The Three Biggest Industries Who Can Utilize A Language Translation Device


