ReelTime VR CEO Barry Henthorn Named To Forbes Technology Council As An Advisor And Contributing Tech Author

03 Jul 2018

ReelTime VR (OTCPK:RLTR) ReelTime’s CEO/CTO Barry Henthorn has accepted a position as a contributing advisor/author for the Forbes Technology Council. Mr. Henthorn will provide assistance to other select CTOs and high-level technical executives of notable companies as well as write articles and insights via Community Voice for the technology section of www.forbes.com.
Forbes, one of the most iconic media companies in the world, has written about Henthorn’s accomplishments throughout his career, and he was chosen as “The Most Innovative Public Company Leader to Watch in 2015,” topping the list of Corporate Innovators to Watch included in the March 2015 magazine.  The list highlighted a few of Mr. Henthorn’s past accomplishments such as his creation of the V.O.P.T. voice protocol which paved the way for the elimination of expensive long distance worldwide. It also outlined his contributions as the architect of grid-based distribution of video via the Internet, which allowed full DVD quality streaming online. Mr. Henthorn was also the creator of the “Free Cellular Phone” which transformed the cellular industry and how consumers obtain mobile devices throughout the United States and beyond. This week Barry is featured in a spot that airs on CNBC during Shark Tank that helps entrepreneurs and inventors navigate the patent process, highlighting ReelTime VR’s new Virtual Reality Technology Patent application based on one of Henthorn’s inventions.
Follow Us
Barry Henthorn
The Forbes Technology Council is an invitation-only community for senior-level tech executives. Members are recruited and selected for the Council not just on the basis of career success, but on their diversity of perspective and willingness to give as much as they gain based on their depth and diversity of experience. The council brings members together in communities tailored to their industry so that they can connect with others best positioned to help them overcome challenges and create new opportunities as well as weigh in at the highest level in the private sector and government on policies and emerging technical trends as experts.
Also Read: Ad Cost Impact Analysis: Upfront TV Ad Sales
Barry Henthorn, CEO of ReelTime, stated: “At ReelTime VR we truly believe in the process and personal attention that Bold Patents is able to provide. Having worked with numerous firms in the past, the modern approach and ability to work with clients anywhere in the US is very refreshing and simply just more effective. I encourage anyone who has a desire to see their ideas turn to a protected product to take advantage of the free information that is being provided.”
Also Read: Top 10 Takeaways From The Mary Meeker 2018 Internet Trends Report


