Bossa Nova Raises $29 Million To Transform The Retail World

04 Jul 2018

New funding round led by Cota Capital will accelerate global expansion
Bossa Nova, the leading provider of real-time, on-shelf product data for the global retail industry, today announced a $29 million funding round led by Cota Capital. With new participation from China Walden Ventures, LG Electronics, and existing investors, this brings Bossa Nova’s total funding to $70 million.
The funding will support headcount growth by 50 percent and will further R&D efforts. Additionally, the company is exploring opening international offices due to high global retailer interest.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc
Bossa Nova also announced a new manufacturing partnership with Flex, the Sketch-to-Scale® solutions provider that designs and builds Intelligent Products for a Connected World™. Flex’s deep multi-industry expertise in applying solutions helps deliver innovation and access to breakthrough technologies to nearly every industry. This partnership enables Bossa Nova to expand production and meet growing customer demand.
Bossa Nova technology and services automate the collection and analysis of on-shelf inventory data in large-scale stores. As a result, retailers are empowered to make real-time, informed inventory decisions and take rapid action. This improves productivity and creates a better shopping experience for consumers. Bossa Nova’s robots are currently deployed in 50 Walmart stores across the United States, making it the largest deployment of this kind of technology in any retailer.
Bruce McWilliams
“The global retail industry is at a critical inflection point,” said Bruce McWilliams, president and chief executive officer at Bossa Nova. “Today’s retail powerhouses require accurate, real-time product information to create a seamless omnichannel shopping experience expected by all customers. Bossa Nova’s technology gives retailers a data-rich and dynamic foundation to transform their store operations. We’re thrilled to have Cota Capital’s support.”
Read More: Insurtech: The New AI Disruption Hitting Insurance
“Bossa Nova and its technology are transforming the retail experience,” said Bobby Yazdani, founder and managing partner at Cota Capital. “Bossa Nova is enabling retailers to rethink decades-old processes by providing a combination of sophisticated technologies. They are at the forefront with focused technical expertise, extensive market knowledge, and a world-class team.”
Bossa Nova is the leading provider of real-time, on-shelf product data for the global retail industry. Its technology collects terabytes of data that enables the retail ecosystem to optimize the omnichannel shopping experience. With a multidisciplinary team of robotics, computer vision, artificial intelligence, and big data scientists, Bossa Nova has solved the challenges to deploy fully autonomous service robots in busy and crowded environments. Bossa Nova is privately held, headquartered in San Francisco with offices in Mountain View and Pittsburgh.
Read More: California Becomes First State To Strengthen Consumer Data Privacy Protections


