Hypergiant Partners With Station Houston To Launch Inaugural AI Fellowship

13 Jun 2018

Investment will propel Houston, an innovation hotspot, to the forefront of AI
Hypergiant, the office of machine intelligence for the Fortune 500, and Station Houston, the hub for Houston’s tech innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem, today announced a partnership to grow the city’s Artificial Intelligence (AI) Tech ecosystem. Revealed to the world on Wednesday at a launch event in Houston, the initiative is designed to tap into Houston’s long history of leadership in the sciences to build a robust community of AI talent and expertise.
Hypergiant is committed to helping support the city’s vision to become a world-leading tech innovation and entrepreneurship hub. Highlighting that commitment, the AI outfitter is creating a first-of-its-kind AI Fellowship. The Fellowship will support entrepreneurs, attract investors into the ecosystem; engage students to connect with new opportunities; and serve as a resource to corporations who are exploring how AI will transform business practices and industry growth.
Read More: NVIDIA Introduces HGX-2, Fusing HPC And AI Computing Into Unified Architecture
Ben Lamm
“The partnership between Hypergiant and Station Houston is a natural one. My co-founders and I have always been impressed with the opportunity in Houston, and how Station Houston has helped those opportunities become realities for entrepreneurs and brands alike,” said Ben Lamm, CEO and Co-Founder of Hypergiant. “Now, in an era when machine intelligence is driving the future of business, it’s essential that we build a home for AI in Houston — a longstanding hub for so many industries.”
To start, Hypergiant will fund the hire of an AI Fellow, a full-time role that is now accepting applications. The AI Fellow will connect the ecosystem in-and-through Houston, helping navigate adoption, education and connections on all-things AI and related technologies. The Fellow will also be responsible for building a vibrant and diverse AI community that can support growth and innovation for Houston business. Applicants can learn more about the role at http://StationHouston.com/careers/.
John Reale
“This is only the beginning,” said John Reale, Co-Founder and CEO of Station Houston, “we’re thrilled to have the support of Hypergiant to provide a super-connector to link startups, universities, venture capitalists, and corporations with insights and best practices around this emerging industry. Through this partnership, we are helping our city realize the full potential of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.This is what it means to think big, yet pragmatic; this is what it means to start tomorrowing today!”
Hypergiant, which launched in February of this year, was formed to address the gap between promise and the results in enterprise AI. Their pragmatic approach has already helped several Houston-based oil and gas companies, such as Schlumberger, begin successful journeys into the AI revolution. Based on this early traction, Hypergiant expects to build up a major presence in Houston over time.
Read More: GameFace Labs Opens Pre-Orders For Android-Based VR Headset Powered By NVIDIA Jetson TX2
“As the fourth-largest city in the country, Houston is one of the best places to do business,” said Ben Lamm, Chief Executive Officer and Co-Founder of Hypergiant. “Our investment in this city has already paid dividends, and I expect the next ten years to see Houston become a case-study of how AI can supercharge a region and an economy.”
Hypergiant is based in Texas, with offices in Austin, Dallas, and Houston. The company is backed by Mythic Ventures, Align Capital, and Beringer Capital and is revenue positive with Fortune 500 customers.


