Liquidity Services Acquires Machinio, A Leading Global Platform For Used Equipment Listings

12 Jul 2018

Acquisition strengthens and expands Liquidity Services’ platform for global equipment buyers and sellers with more scale, services and channels to conduct commerce
Liquidity Services, Inc. a global solution provider in the reverse supply chain with the world’s largest marketplace for business surplus, today announced it has acquired Machinio Corp., a leading global online platform for listing used equipment for sale in the construction, machine tool, transportation, printing and agriculture sectors. The acquisition expands the portfolio of solutions Liquidity Services offers its base of commercial and government customers to monetize assets. Machinio operates a robust online equipment listing marketplace, with over 1.2 million assets for sale, valued at over $25 billion, and 10 million annual website visits across 190 countries. Machinio also provides equipment sellers with a suite of online analytics tools and software solutions to optimize their business performance. Machinio customers will benefit from Liquidity Services’ global equipment industry experience and network of over three million registered buyers, providing further global exposure for Machinio’s equipment listings.
Machinio offers annual recurring subscriptions to over 2,200 dealers, brokers and other suppliers of used equipment that enable them to more efficiently sell their inventory to a broad base of interested buyers.  Machinio uses proprietary technology, data management tools and a mobile first approach to connect buyers with the most relevant global supply of used equipment available for sale. In turn, Machinio provides sellers highly effective, automated tools to reach qualified business buyers. Machinio has grown rapidly over the past five years and now has a global team serving customers across Europe, North America, South America and Asia.
Follow Us
“This acquisition supports our strategy as the world’s largest marketplace for business surplus by expanding the services and channels we offer our sellers to maximize recovery and growing our network of buyers in important global equipment verticals,” said Bill Angrick, Chairman of the Board and CEO of Liquidity Services. “Machinio is delivering superior value to their customers and our combined offering will enable us to grow our transaction volume, expand our recurring revenue service offerings, and utilize technology and innovation to improve our seller and buyer experience.”
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
Dmitriy Rokhfeld
“We are excited to partner with Liquidity Services and look forward to leveraging their expertise and resources to deliver significant value to our customers. Liquidity Services’ global brand and strong relationships will further accelerate Machinio’s growth. Together, we will continue to enhance our platform and services to meet the needs of global sellers and buyers of used equipment,” said Dmitriy Rokhfeld, President of Machinio.
Machinio, based in Chicago and Berlin, will continue to operate under its current branding and management team led by executive co-founders Dmitriy Rokhfeld and Dan Pinto.
Read More: The Three Biggest Industries Who Can Utilize A Language Translation Device


