Meltwater Acquires Sysomos To Unify Media Intelligence And Social Analytics

25 Apr 2018

The Latest Acquisition Expands Meltwater’s Ability to Incorporate Online News and Data with Social Media Analytics in One Robust Platform
Meltwater, a pioneer of media intelligence and now Outside Insight, today announced its acquisition of Sysomos, a leader in social analytics and engagement. The addition of Sysomos to Meltwater enables organizations to analyze social media, news, and other human-generated content in one platform, furthering Meltwater’s mission to give businesses the insights from outside data, helping them stay ahead. Peter Heffring, the former Sysomos CEO, will run Meltwater’s Social Analytics division, in its new avatar.
Recommended Read: Contextual Content and AI: The New Wingmen for Email Marketing Campaigns
Meltwater Aims to Bring Together News and Social Media Under One Company
Celebrating his recent scoop, Jorn Lyseggen, founder and CEO of Meltwater, said, “All the social analytics companies look at social data in isolation, limiting the insights for brands and businesses. With our acquisition of Sysomos, we can bring together news and social media under one company, giving social data context while adding social engagement to our news and media monitoring offering.”
Recommended Read: Mobfox Introduces Audience Analytics for Better In-App Monetization
Sysomos Will Become the Social Analytics Division
Niklas de Besche
For the PR and communications teams who engage with influencers over social media, Meltwater’s existing Media Intelligence division will now offer integrated news monitoring and social engagement. Under Meltwater, Sysomos will become the Social Analytics division with a focus on delivering timely and relevant insights to brands and marketing teams. Both divisions support Meltwater’s mission to give businesses insights from external data.
At the time of this announcement, Niklas de Besche, Executive Director of Product at Meltwater, said, “It’s not enough to simply give clients raw data or shallow analytics – businesses need relevant insights. Between our combined data partnerships, Sysomos’ social analytics and Meltwater’s AI models, we can combine social and news data to extract game-changing insights for both of our clients.”
In its new identity within Meltwater, Sysomos may retain its position as a global leader in social marketing and analytics empowering brands and agencies to turn data-driven insights into actionable customer engagement opportunities.
Marketers Would Gain the Context Needed to Collect More Meaningful Insights Across Their Earned and Owned Social Channels
Peter Heffring, Former CEO, Sysomos
Former Sysomos CEO  Peter Heffring, said, “By joining the Meltwater team, our clients benefit from the leadership and global scale of one of the world’s first SaaS companies.”
Peter added, “In order to enhance the search and analytics experience in the Sysomos Platform, we will leverage the AI models and information extracted from the unstructured web by Meltwater. This will give our clients the context needed to collect more meaningful insights across their earned and owned social channels.”
Following the acquisition of DataSift last month, the Sysomos acquisition cements Meltwater as the market leader in both Social Analytics and Media Intelligence.
Niklas added, “At the same time, with Sysomos under the Meltwater brand, we can offer our clients greater integration between social engagement and media monitoring.”
The Sysomos acquisition is Meltwater’s seventh in the last 18 months.
Currently, Meltwater is recognized as a pioneer of media intelligence and now Outside Insight, gives businesses the information advantage they need to stay ahead.
Meltwater is dedicated to personal, global service built on the local expertise of 55 offices across six continents. Meltwater is also committed to fostering the data science ecosystem through MEST, a pan-African entrepreneurial program, and incubator, and Shack15, a global data science community.


