Digital Identity Solutions Company Vision-Box Working On Seamless Travel Technology In Border Control

05 Jul 2018

New Delhi Office Will Address The Growing Demand For Biometric Digital Identity Services Within The Travel Industry, As Well As By Government And Private Companies
The goal of this investment is to accelerate the introduction of digital identity solutions and seamless travel technology in the Travel, Border Control, Smart Government and Smart City fields. The new office will address the growing demand for biometric digital identity services within the travel industry, as well as by government and private companies.
An official reception was held last week, on the 27th of June, hosted by Vision-Box and the Embassy of Portugal in New Delhi, gathering the highest Indian and Portuguese Government representatives, as well as high profile individuals from the aviation sector.
Read More: Working Together To Strengthen The Lives Of Rural Americans
At the Ribbon Cutting Ceremony, Eurico Brilhante Dias, Secretary of State for Internationalization Affairs of Portugal, stated
“Congratulations! It’s a great moment to be in New Delhi at the inauguration of Vision-Box’s new office. For the Secretary of State of International Affairs, it’s always important to see with our own eyes how Portuguese companies, in this case with great Indian partners, are developing not only our society but at the same time having a huge contribution to develop a better society also in India. (…) We share knowledge and technology and we don’t want to grab. We want to add.”
He added: “It’s a great political and diplomatic moment. The Portuguese and Indian Governments share a vision of a common future. Let’s work together more (…) to have a better common future.”
Miguel Leitmann
Miguel Leitmann, Vision-Box Global CEO, sees the new office as a commitment to support the local industry in their modernization efforts:  “This office will be the second home of a dedicated Vision-Box team, 100% committed to the Indian market. More than an office, we want to create a competence center linking the most advanced identity management technology, the best practices in passenger processing and the enormous growth potential of India.  We hope this is where Vision-Box, the Indian Government, Airports and Airlines will all together contribute to positively transform the Indian passenger lifestyle, and deliver the next level of the overall citizen’s digital journey.  India has always been a dream. We’re very proud and excited to be here. I am personally committed to promoting a fruitful cooperation between stakeholders towards seamless travel, as well as more efficiency, security and business opportunities for the country.”
Read More: AgEagle’s Drone Imagery To Help Reduce Chemicals In Food
Vineet J. Mehra, Vision-Box India’s Executive Partner and Regional Advisor to the Board, said that:  “India is at an important turning point of its history, investing in the modernization of identity management and seamless travel programs. It is crucial for the country to have trusted partners and draw on their local teams with international expertise to support our efforts to leverage India digitization journey. Vision-Box brings in the right attitude and knowledge to partner up with India and to bring our vision to reality.”
At an early stage, the new team will be led by Mr. Pedro Pinto, Senior Manager, Regional Strategy and Operations for Vision-Box India, and will integrate world-class Engineers, Software Developers and Technical Support Experts, both local and international.
Read More: World Cup 2018: Avid Maestro Graphics Systems Give AR Capabilities For Globo’s Coverage


