Coincierge Club Partners With ProMexico To Remove Corruption And Cost From The Economy

25 May 2018

Its Main Goal Was To Disrupt The Las Vegas Strip By Eliminating The Monopoly Hold The Nevada Gaming Control Board Has On Nightclub and Non-Gaming Casino Operations
Coincierge Club, an app that allows users to use cryptocurrency to pay for goods and services, store value and make instant person-to-person transfers, has established a partnership with Mexico in hopes to improve the country’s economy by removing corruption and cost.
Coincierge Club established the deal in January of this year, and with the help of ProMexico the company has continued to evolve the partnership. Since joining forces, Concierge Club has created a coin and a website for the project.
Darryll DiPietro
Coincierge Club CEO, Darryll DiPietro, says the partnership will help give the power back to individuals, “When Eduardo Gonzalez Diaz de Leon approached us at our booth at Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas, he had a vision of using crypto to help the economy of Mexico by removing corruption and cost. We were able to close this deal a week after at the Mexicali Economic Development Corporation (EDC) in Mesa, Arizona. This will take the power of the money out of the cartel’s hands, as well as reduce illegal trade.”
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Powerful Women In The Tech World
When the company started, its main goal was to disrupt the Las Vegas strip by eliminating the monopoly hold the Nevada Gaming Control Board has on nightclub and non-gaming casino operations. Its cryptocurrency would allow vendors, with the help of Senate Bill 398, to avoid taxes, regulation or license requirements as long as they operated on blockchain technology.
Today, their vision has grown to help more retail vendors—including those operating off the strip—by transitioning businesses to blockchain technology. When presented with advantages like no chargebacks, zero processing fees and the ability to own their own money, the conversion to digital money exchange seems like a no-brainer.
In addition to offering zero processing fees, Coincierge Club also provides the fastest technology available and an industry-leading 13K supported coins. Their enterprise solution performs 250,000 transactions per second, which is a 500% increase from Visa’s current limits. And with a powerful and intuitive platform, businesses can easily integrate with nearly any POS system to accept digital currency and avoid credit card processing fees.
DiPietro believes crypto is the future of currency, and he’s excited to see how it will continue to change and support businesses, “My prediction for the future of blockchain and crypto is that it will infiltrate all aspects of production and automation. It will create a trust that we as a society have never seen. It will disrupt corrupt industries and redistribute power and wealth to society. With Crypto specifically, bankers and brokers will not be necessary, creating higher profit margins for business owners.”
The Coincierge Club app allows our users to use cryptocurrency to pay for goods and services, store value and make instant person to person transfers. The app is available now at the Google Play App store, with availability on the iTunes store to come soon. You can create a profile, create new private and public keys, or import your keys into the user profile and have the peace of mind that your information is safe, secure, and encrypted.
 Founded in 2008, Rio Vista Universal is located in Beverly Hills and is at the crossroads of technology and entertainment. They are a full media corporation in TV, film and VR production, stadium concerts and management, public relations, digital marketing, social media with some of the most experienced partners in the industry. Under the leadership of President, James Ganiere, RVU provides full digital marketing, social media and PR support to Coincierge Club.
  Read More: How Do You Close The Diversity Gap In Technology Companies?
 


