Epson Collaborates With AR Software Innovator ByondXR To Showcase Cloud-based Immersive Media Publishing Platform At AWE 2018

02 Jun 2018

Integration of Epson Moverio AR SDK into Easy-To-Use AR Publishing Platform Redefines AR Content Creation and Consumption
AWE — Epson, providers of the Moverio® augmented reality (AR) smart glasses platform, in collaboration with ByondXR, a pioneering immersive content creation software company, will be showcasing its latest AR developments at AWE 2018. One of the first companies to integrate the newly released Moverio AR SDK into its platform, ByondXR enables developers and creatives to seamlessly create AR content for Moverio AR Smart Glasses using its full web-based editor.
In the current market, creating immersive media can be complicated and expensive due to high development costs, market fragmentation and lack of online updates. With ByondXR’s Immersive Suite, a robust AR/VR cloud-based publishing platform featuring a fast and intuitive 360 editor and enterprise-level content management system, creating content-rich, immersive experiences has never been easier.
Noam Levavi
“Whether we’re building our own features or collaborating with other innovative platforms such as Epson Moverio glasses, ByondXR is committed to the advancement of the immersive media industry and finding new ways to support our headset partners,” said Noam Levavi, co-founder and CEO of ByondXR. “Deployment of the Epson Moverio AR SDK gives us a unique opportunity to provide brands and businesses with tools to develop dynamic, interactive AR content.”
Equipped with innovative and easy-to-use tools such as drag-and-drop features, cross platform deployment, gamification, reports and analysis, multiple 2D, 3D and 360 media format support and more, the ByondXR solution empowers brands, media companies, retailers and digital agencies to create AR content and distribute them across multiple devices in real time –  all with no coding required.
Leon Laroue
“ByondXR’s platform is truly innovative in that it lowers the barriers to entry for AR content creation and can be applied to any industry, rep  resenting a global market opportunity,” said Leon Laroue, software manager, augmented reality solutions, Epson America. “By combining the Epson Moverio AR SDK with ByondXR’s platform, our goal is to make it as seamless as possible for businesses to fill the world with new AR content and ultimately redefine the future of how AR content can be created and viewed.”
Attendees at AWE 2018 will be able to demo the ByondXR full web-based editor along with the Moverio AR SDK and the previously released AR Flight Simulator App firsthand at the Epson booth #618.


