Information Builders Helps Companies Achieve Smarter Data Quality With Artificial Intelligence

30 Oct 2017

Executive Seminar Series Highlights How Emerging Technologies Can Improve Data Quality and Accelerate Analytics Success
Information Builders, a leader in business intelligence (BI) and analytics, information integrity, and integration solutions, announced a new executive seminar series designed to help current customers and prospects use artificial intelligence (AI) and other advanced technologies to improve the quality of new and existing data. The Smarter Data Quality Through AI series, taking place in a number of cities throughout the US, will highlight how AI can remedy data anomalies and help organizations drive actionable intelligence.
With enterprise information stemming from multiple sources and in numerous formats, ensuring the accuracy, completeness, timeliness, and consistency of this data is essential. As such, data quality has become an increasingly important discipline and a vital component of any enterprise information management strategy. However, many organizations struggle when embarking upon data quality initiatives. Common challenges include ambiguity over data ownership and confusion surrounding data requirements, but the most significant obstacles are anomalies in the data. By applying AI technology to predict these data irregularities, companies can overcome this impediment and dramatically improve the quality of their information.
Information Builders’ Smarter Data Quality Through AI series will provide greater insight into how AI can address inconsistencies in enterprise information. Attendees will learn:
Key areas where data quality is critical
Current methods employed by data quality technologists
The importance of pattern recognition in spotting data anomalies
How to apply AI to drive actionable intelligence in the near term and long term
The human element in the success of these initiatives
Gerald Cohen, president and CEO, Information Builders, said, “Artificial intelligence brings numerous opportunities to the BI and analytics industry, but its potential to improve data quality initiatives is arguably one of the most exciting prospects. This has been an area where companies have historically struggled, and this struggle is only compounded in the big data age with our ever-increasing volume and variety of information sources. Our Smarter Data Quality Through AI series will enable attendees to rise to this challenge, and tap AI and other advanced technologies to improve the quality of their information and obtain greater value from their data environments.”


