C360 Technologies To Provide Immersive Video Content To 2018 Winter Olympics Coverage

12 Feb 2018

Innovative Camera Technology to be Incorporated within Live Televised Broadcasts of Short Track Speed Skating, Figure Skating and Hockey
C360 Technologies, a Pittsburgh-based company focusing on 360-degree linear and over-the-top (OTT) broadcast quality video solutions, will bring its immersive camera technology to the 2018 Winter Olympics in PyeongChang.
C360’s camera technology will be incorporated into the live event broadcasts of Short Track Speed Skating, Figure Skating and Hockey. The camera will provide additional viewpoints of each sport, delivering content in real time for live or replay broadcast situations.
“We are extremely honored by the opportunity to bring an added viewing dimension through our camera technology to the 2018 Winter Olympic Games,” said Evan Wimer, C360 Co-Founder and Chairman. “We believe in the value that immersive video can bring to traditional sports broadcasts, and the PyeongChang Olympics is perfect event to introduce our newest GEN2 Immersive Camera System camera to a global audience.”
Each C360 camera-enhanced broadcast will feature one camera strategically placed within the arenas for each sport to capture both live competition and event atmosphere. The GEN2 Immersive Camera will provide a 360-degree view of the action on the ice.
All content captured by C360 cameras in PyeongChang will immediately be made available to all Olympic Rights Holding Broadcasters (RHB) around the world.
Joe Tomko
Established in 2008 by Wimer and Co-Founder and Chief Operations Officer Joe Tomko, C360 Technologies has been a leader in providing high-quality immersive video solutions to broadcast networks and sports leagues. Its camera delivers live, 360-degree non-stitched video in which the viewpoint can be controlled by users on second screen devices.
Prior to providing immersive live views from the 2018 Winter Olympics, C360’s camera technology was featured as part of FOX Sports’ 2017-2018 College Football game telecast slate, delivering 360-degree live footage to FOX Sports’ VR social channels.
In June 2017, C360 secured a $3.5 million oversubscribed Series A funding round which included contribution from Boeing’s HorizonX Ventures, making C360 the first Pittsburgh-based company to receive an investment from the venture arm of the world’s largest aerospace company. The investment by HorizonX Ventures also broadens the reach of C360’s camera technology with the potential of future application in the aeronautical, military and autonomous vehicle space. Additional C360 investors include Pasadena Angels, MI-12 and Pennsylvania-based BlueTree Capital Group.
 


