Bluecore Partners With Magento Commerce For Enhanced Personalized Customer Interactions

21 Mar 2018

New Retail Intelligence Offering Will Activate Retailers’ Live Product Sets, Use Insights to Pair Products and Communications with Customers
Bluecore, an AI-driven retail marketing platform, has announced its technology partnership with Magento Commerce. Together, Magento and Bluecore will equip merchants with new opportunities to interact with their customers through individualized communications deployed directly from the Magento platform.
The new offering is now available on the Magento Marketplace. Bluecore brings together website data, audience data, and live product insights to match customers with the products they love.
Magento offers a strong portfolio of open, cloud-based omnichannel solutions, including in-store, retail associate and order management, allowing merchants to successfully integrate the digital and physical shopping experiences.
Bluecore will complement the Magento platform’s existing technology by introducing new and relevant opportunities for customer interactions and a streamlined approach to driving more sales and more repeat purchases.
The partnership will empower retailers to build targeted audience segments and campaigns based on customer behaviors and live product data. Bluecore will also power trigger messaging in response to common eCommerce retail events, such as product price drops, pending customer churn and abandoned site searches.
Fayez Mohamood, CEO, Bluecore
At the time of this announcement, Fayez Mohamood, CEO, Bluecore, said, “Magento is an ideal partner for Bluecore, as their platform addresses a number of evolving retail needs and caters to retailers who are already committed to customer-centric experiences. This collaboration will help Magento merchants to drive more revenue through product catalog based personalization. This pairing will set a new industry standard for marketing in retail.”
Additionally, Bluecore will provide Magento retailers with product-informed insights and recommended actions based on predicted customer attributes, such as price sensitivity, product and category affinities and predicted customer lifetime value.
The Bluecore solution prioritizes fast and easy implementation with simple integrations and minimal development work as well as an intuitive user experience for retail and e-commerce marketers. By activating dynamic product data for the first time, Bluecore’s email marketing solution solves the missing piece of the performance puzzle: The ability to respond to customer behaviors with triggered, and individualized communication.


