The IMasons Examine The Impact Digital Technologies Are Having On Society At Datacloud Monaco

30 May 2018

Datacloud Europe 2018 Will Be Held On The 12-14 June at the Grimaldi Forum in Monaco
The Infrastructure Masons [iMasons] will return to Datacloud Monaco, the world’s leading datacentre and cloud congress for senior executives, to discuss how digital technologies are influencing society. The panel session, spread across two themes, will examine the relevance of the infrastructure in a ‘decentralised’ zero-latency life then explore the levels of human scrutiny needed in an increasingly automated AI connected world. The panel comprises: Dr Julie M. Albright, Ph.D. digital sociologist from the University of Southern California and board member iMasons; Dean Nelson, founder and chairman iMasons and Curt Belusar, End User Advisory Council iMasons.
Read More: Interview With Sam Kim, CEO, Lucidity
“A year ago today we hosted the first iMasons local chapter held outside of the US where the idea that ‘builders’ of the digital age could use data centre infrastructure to improve ‘the economy, the environment, and society as a whole’ had been introduced,” said Philip Low, chairman BroadGroup, organisers of Datacloud Monaco. “These discussions continue in a thought-provoking session that will look at how digital infrastructure influences society. What is the role of the data centre, once thought of as the central nervous system of the enterprise, in a new global peer-to-peer consensus-based network, driven by the cloud, IoT and edge computing? The issue of trust and ethics will be argued in a second debate about the ‘truth and lies in a connected world’. Can AI machines be more adept than humans at checking our systems and safeguarding our privacy?”
Dr Julie M. Albright: “As stewards for some of the world’s largest and most powerful computing environments, iMasons members not only drive technological advancement, they have a responsibility to steer the moral compass. In their positions they have a duty to act responsibly by having a better understanding of the kind of impact these technologies have on our wider society. Digital infrastructure affects every aspect of our lives and we hope this panel acts as a stimulus for further debate.”
iM Panel – 13th June – The Impact of Digital Technologies on Society
Central Theatre – 10:20 – 11:10 (Grimaldi Forum) Monaco
Founded in 2016, iMasons is an independent professional association of executives and technologists entrusted with building and operating the physical and logical structures of the Digital Age.
BroadGroup is the organiser of the premier forum and awards Datacloud Europe. Datacloud has established itself as Europe’s only must-attend data centre and cloud business forum and expects more than 2000+ senior executives at their 16th annual event.
Read More: How Virtual Nurses Are Elevating Patient Care


