Sophia, The Humanoid Robot, And Dr. David Hanson, Robotics And AI Expert, Confirmed To Deliver ITW 2018 Keynote

03 May 2018

ITW Welcomes Unprecedented Number of Telecom and Technology Media to the Largest Global Wholesale Event, Taking Place May 6-9 in Chicago, U.S.
International Telecoms Week (ITW) 2018, the annual meeting for the global wholesale telecommunications community, announces that Dr. David Hanson, Founder and CEO of Hanson Robotics, will deliver the event keynote: “AI, Automation and Digitization: A Transformed Future?” On Sunday, May 6, Dr. Hanson will be joined by Sophia, the Artificial Intelligence (AI) robot, in a discussion of how emerging technologies will transform industries and society in the next 10 years, the advancements that will be required at the network layer to support these innovations, and the role carriers will play in an automated, digitized world. Hanson Robotics is comprised of a world-class team of roboticists, AI experts, technologists, and hardware and software engineers.
Returning to Chicago’s Hyatt Regency and adjacent Swissôtel, May 6-9, ITW is the wholesale telecommunications industry’s largest annual event with more than 6,500 delegates from all areas of the wholesale community, who together represent more than 1,900 companies from 139 countries.
Dr. David Hanson
“We are pleased to announce that Dr. David Hanson of Hanson Robotics will deliver the keynote at ITW,” comments Ross Webster, ITW Event Director.  “As Dr. Hanson and Sophia, the Artificial Intelligence robot, will explore, AI is expected to have an impact on a multitude of industries, including optimizing and automating telecom networks.”
Produced by Capacity Media, the event attracts executives from leading global organizations, including headline sponsors AT&T, China Telecom Global, Etisalat, Orange International Carriers, PCCW Global, Sparkle, STC, Tata Communications, Telefónica, and Telstra for educational programs, meetings and networking.  Attendees leverage ITW as a platform to exchange business ideas and opportunities as well as expand their global reach via the establishment of new collaborative relationships.
ITW also announces the availability of the ITW Press Room at the conference, and extends an invitation to global accredited media organizations.  Event participants are invited to submit press releases and news to be considered for the ITW Show Daily – a magazine distributed daily throughout the conference.
Organized and managed by iMiller Public Relations, a globally-recognized public relations and content marketing consulting firm serving the telecom and technology industries, the ITW Press Room generates the opportunity for sponsors and attendees to meet with trade and business media organizations.


