Sisense Eureka! Brought Together Hundreds Of Analytics & AI Innovators To Discuss The Future Of Business Intelligence

22 Jun 2018

Air Canada, Skullcandy, WeWork and ResMed among Key Speakers at Premier Event for the Business Analytics Community
Sisense also announced a virtual data scientist bot that allows anyone in a simple drag and drop to run AI on her/his data
Follow Us
Sisense, disrupting the BI market by simplifying business analytics for complex data, today announced the successful conclusion of Eureka!, its sold-out, invitation-only, global client event in New York City June 12 through June 13, 2018.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
Eureka! was an impactful two-day event where hundreds of senior business leaders and analytics professionals came together to learn and share innovative best practices in analytics and data-driven insights.  Speaker highlights included:
“Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game” Presented by Billy Beane, EVP of Baseball Operations for the Oakland Athletics.
“Augmented Analytics: Explore the Beauty of the Human Mind and Machine” Presented by Jen Underwood, Founder of Impact Analytix.
“Prediction Machines: The Simple Economics of Artificial Intelligence” Presented by Professor Avi Goldfarb, Co-Author of “Predictive Machines: The Simple Economics of Artificial Intelligence.”
“Analytics for Connected Healthcare” Presented by Bobby Ghoshal, Chief Technology Officer at ResMed.
“Doing Good With Data” Presented by Bill Janczak, Manager, Information Services, Indiana Donor Network.
“Implementing Advanced Analytics” Presented by TJ Houk, Chief Data Officer, Trupanion.
Read More: Google And AI Predictions: When Am I Dying?
Eureka! also offered sessions with Paul Zolfaghari, Managing Director at Carrick Capital Partners and former President of Microstrategy, as well as Laurent Paris, CTO of WeWork.
Amir Orad
“Eureka! allowed our clients to share best practices, discuss trends, and learn from other industry thought leaders about the future of analytics,” said Sisense CEO Amir Orad. “Sisense is a leader in simplifying complex data to extract insights — at Eureka!, attendees had the opportunity to showcase how they are pioneers in their own right, sharing how analytics are transforming and disrupting their industries, and providing real-world examples of the awesome potential of business intelligence.”
Sisense also unveiled new AI bot functionality at the event, called Sisense Boto, part of Sisense’s strategy to embed insights everywhere. It not only allows people to “chat” with their data via Facebook, Skype and Slack, but also leverage machine learning to create a virtual data scientist, which can reveal and proactively send discoveries.
Read More: Recruiters Can Connect With Candidates Using AI
Guy Levy-Yurista
“Sisense took the lead in applying machine learning and artificial intelligence to the BI space, with the introduction of chatbots, IoT-enabled devices, and smart speakers such as the Amazon Echo,” said Guy Levy-Yurista, PhD, Vice President of Strategic Growth and Innovation at Sisense. “Now, we’re moving beyond AI that simply provides increased access to data-driven insights, and building out our vision for augmented analytics. Sisense Boto leverages cutting edge artificial intelligence to make its own discoveries  —  insights that are important, but too subtle to be detected by the human eye — and relating them directly to users.”


