Autonomous Vehicle Sensors Conference Comes To San Jose In June

08 Jun 2018

During the Autonomous Vehicle Sensors Conference, attendees will have the opportunity to see firsthand the sensor technologies driving the automotive electronics market forward and hear from the industry’s innovators and thought leaders on the opportunities and pitfalls present in this burgeoning market
The 2018 Autonomous Vehicle Sensors Conference, the only event of its kind to focus exclusively on automotive applications of sensor technology, will take place June 26th at the McEnery Convention Center in San Jose, California. Co-located with the annual Sensors Expo & Conference (#Sensors18), the premier event for sensors in automotive will include a full-day of in-depth technical sessions and interactive panels featuring industry leaders, rising start-ups, as well as research analysts and the investment community. With a dedicated automotive theater and pavilion following on June 27th and 28th, the 2018 Sensors Expo is the only opportunity for design engineers and OEMs to learn about the sensor technologies driving the automotive industry forward.
Read More: Do You Have A Response Plan In Case Of A Data Breach Under GDPR?
Quick Links:
Registration is available at: http://www.autosensorsconf.com/register
View the conference schedule: http://www.autosensorsconf.com/schedule
Review our roster of speakers: http://www.autosensorsconf.com/speakers
Follow the event on social media channels: Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, and Instagram
During the 2018 event, attendees will discover who will become the central players, where the adoption of AV will start, and which “sense” technology will make the biggest impact. Notable sessions include:
Leonard Nieman from General Motors presenting, “What is the AV Car Experience?”
Dave Anderson from Samsung Harman addressing, “Challenges on AD Development”
Abhay Rai from Sony Electronics discussing, “What is Next for Camera Sensing?”
LiDAR Face Off featuring Aeye Inc., Blackmore Sensors and Analytics, Inc., and Phantom Intelligence
Read More: Interview With Jeff Gallino, Founder And CTO, CallMiner
In addition to the Autonomous Vehicle Sensors Conference taking place on Tuesday, June 26th, attendees are welcome to attend the co-located Sensors Expo on Wednesday, June 27th and Thursday, June 28th, which includes two additional days of keynotes, free expo education, and networking opportunities.
Attendees can visit the Sensors Expo Exhibit Hall to attend automotive-featured sessions in the Autonomous Vehicle Sensors Theater and see exhibits from more than 300 companies including those with featured automotive applications on display. Such organizations include: Analog Devices, Bosch Sensortec, Excelitas Technologies Corp., Hamamatsu Corporation, Kistler Instrument Corp., Meggitt/Endevco, Melexis, Microchip Technology Inc., Murata Electronics, Ouster, PCB Piezotronics, Inc., Renishaw Inc., ROHM Co., Ltd, STMicroelectronics, TDK Corporation, Trafag Sensors and Controls, TE Connectivity and more.
Read More: How Virtual Nurses Are Elevating Patient Care
A startup review competition hosted by the Autotech Council’s Executive Director, Liz Kerton, will also take place Wednesday, June 27th from noon to 1:00 p.m. local time. A handpicked selection of startup companies will take the stage to reveal innovations that are set to shake up the automotive industry and share their vision for the future. A panel of industry experts will facilitate the discussion and ultimately ask show attendees to judge who is most likely to succeed.
Willard Tu
“As technology matures and consumer demand continues to rise, autonomous vehicles are poised to transform the automotive industry. During the Autonomous Vehicle Sensors Conference, attendees will have the opportunity to see firsthand the sensor technologies driving the automotive electronics market forward and hear from the industry’s innovators and thought leaders on the opportunities and pitfalls present in this burgeoning market,” noted Willard Tu, Conference Program Lead and Senior Director, Automotive Business Unit for Xilinx.
Read More: Singapore Implements Artificial Intelligence Governance And Ethics Initiatives


