Voyage With Velodyne

19 Jun 2018

Velodyne Collaborates With Voyage To Enable Autonomous Vehicles In Communities, By Using Their Most Powerful LiDAR Sensor Yet.
When Driving Yourself Isn’t Possible, Taking A Trip With Voyage And Velodyne Makes Transport Easy Once More.
Voyage, a leading autonomous vehicle startup, has cemented their relationship with Velodyne LiDAR, launching an all-Velodyne, autonomous-driving system. This new offering, which features the new VLS-128 sensor mounted on Chrysler Pacifica vehicles, will be deployed as a fleet of autonomous cars for communities across the USA.
The modified Enterprise vehicle out on the road with the help of Voyage and Velodyne. (Photo: Business Wire)
“Velodyne is energized by Voyage’s compelling mission to help communities in North America by putting people first. We are pleased to support their advanced autonomous vehicle program with our newest product, the VLS-128. The public and their safety deserve nothing less: a product with lessons learned from millions of miles and 10 years of LiDAR development. The VLS-128 provides the range, resolution and accuracy required by the most advanced vehicle programs in the world. We can’t wait to see where Voyage takes our VLS-128,” says Cesar Alejandro Montero, Marketing Director at Velodyne LiDAR.
Read More: Interview With Dorian Selz, Co-Founder & CEO, Squirro
Voyage has designed a complete ‘sense-surround’ configuration for 360-degree monitoring using the Velodyne LiDARs. They have streamlined the vehicle procurement procedure, retro-fitted the vehicles with sensors and is introducing them into various communities.
Oliver Cameron
“An autonomous vehicle should provide a safe and smooth ride each and every time. The combination of Voyage’s autonomous technology and the Velodyne VLS-128 LiDAR enables our autonomous vehicles to sense the world at incredible resolution and range, ensuring an amazing passenger experience for our riders,” says Oliver Cameron, CEO of Voyage.
Voyage is also collaborating with Enterprise Fleet Management, an affiliate of Enterprise Holdings Inc., the world’s largest car rental company as measured by revenue and fleet size. Voyage will modify a fleet of Chrysler Pacifica vehicles leased from Enterprise to become autonomous taxis.
Read More: Will Artificial Intelligence Bring An End To Stupid Meetings?
Brice Adamson
“We are excited to provide vehicles to support the expansion of Voyage’s operations. Like Enterprise, Voyage understands that world-class fleet management is fundamental to the long-term success of autonomous fleets. Our partnership ensures that the Voyage team is able to focus on what they do best – developing autonomous technology and providing transportation services to community residents – without having to worry about acquiring and maintaining those vehicles,” says Brice Adamson of Enterprise Fleet Management.
Voyage’s mission is all about the journey, and making each one better than the last. Driver, passenger and pedestrian safety are equally important to each of the companies involved here. Velodyne, Voyage and Enterprise are actively working to create safer, more comfortable and more affordable automotive options—powered by breakthrough autonomous driving technology.


