Cognizant’s Netcentric Named 2018 Adobe Experience Cloud Partner Of The Year In EMEA

14 Jun 2018

The Award Acknowledges Netcentric’s Adobe Experience Cloud Expertise In Bridging The Gap Between Marketing And Technology, And Facilitating Successful Execution Of Clients’ Digital Transformation Strategies
Cognizant announced Netcentric, a Cognizant Digital Business, has been named 2018 Adobe Experience Cloud Partner of the Year in EMEA by Adobe, the global leader in digital marketing solutions.
Netcentric was recognized by Adobe for its ability in helping clients improve customer experiences by harnessing the full power of Adobe Experience Cloud. The award was presented at Adobe Summit EMEA in London. The award acknowledges Netcentric’s Adobe Experience Cloud expertise in bridging the gap between marketing and technology, and facilitating successful execution of clients’ digital transformation strategies.
With the help of Netcentric and Adobe Experience Cloud, Raiffeisen Schweiz, Switzerland’s leading mortgage provider, transformed into an omni-channel business, allowing customers to interact with the bank any time and through various touchpoints.
Read More: Avionos Releases New Data Revealing How Consumer Expectations Are Driving Retail Strategies
“Netcentric’s approach to delivering outstanding solutions has accelerated our digital journey,” said Felix Wenger, Head Channel and Distribution at Raiffeisen Schweiz, a Netcentric client for many years. “We continue to rely on Netcentric to enable superior personalized customer experiences by leveraging the entire Adobe Experience Cloud.”
Elian Kool
“Our partnership with Adobe, and their recognition of our work through this award, is testament to the value we create for our clients in combining experience and content on Adobe’s technology platform,” said Elian Kool, CEO of Netcentric. “We are thrilled to be recognized as an outstanding partner to our clients and to Adobe. It is a tribute to our ever-dedicated, committed, talented team, as well as to our Adobe Experience Cloud expertise, to receive this award.”
Jay Dettling
“The successful collaboration between Adobe and Netcentric has been critical to driving digital transformation initiatives for our joint clients,” said Jay Dettling, Vice President, Global Partners, Adobe.  “We are delighted to honor Netcentric as the 2018 Adobe Experience Cloud Partner of the Year in EMEA and look forward to continuing our work with them in 2018 and beyond.”
Read More: Hypergiant Partners With Station Houston To Launch Inaugural AI Fellowship
Cognizant acquired Netcentric in late 2017 and it is a member of the Cognizant Interactive global digital agency network. Cognizant’s global marketing, technology, artificial intelligence and analytics capabilities, combined with Netcentric’s Adobe Experience Cloud expertise, enables clients to achieve superior business outcomes by personalizing and delivering engaging customer experiences.
Adobe also recently recognized Cognizant as its 2018 Delivery Quality Partner of the Year in the Americas for exceptional customer service on joint large digital transformation projects. Cognizant is a key partner in helping clients conceive, deliver and manage personal, pleasing, consistent and omni-channel experiences on Adobe Cloud Platform.


