Invoke® LIVE: The Next Generation Uses Video To Let Researchers See Authentic, Global Consumer Sentiment

21 May 2018

Invoke® Solutions, the Big Qual Decisions™ company, has released the next generation of Invoke LIVE, integrating instantaneous online video to bring global entertainment and media companies and brands even closer to understanding the behavioral drivers of the world’s consumers.
Moderated by Invoke’s market research experts and powered by Invoke’s patented, cloud-based, large-scale audience research dashboard, LIVE events bring together key stakeholders at client companies and hundreds of participating consumers in an organic, real-time conversation.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
By the end of each 60- or 90-minute consumer-led journey, these stakeholders—writers, producers, marketers, and C-suite executives—gain an intimate understanding of the “why” behind the “what” of viewers’ or consumers’ perceptions. Armed with that intelligence, they can make swifter and better-informed decisions by the end of each LIVE session.
Invoke LIVE with video “lets you see the book beneath the cover”
The latest generation of Invoke LIVE adds greater nuance and even clearer indicators of audience response by integrating live video of subsets of audience members who engage in these large-scale, online sessions.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World
Gigi Wang
This video connection brings stakeholders face to face with dozens of target consumers who “opt-in” to on-camera participation prior to each LIVE event. The live video lets researchers witness facial expressions and physical reactions and hear tone-of-voice—as if everyone were physically in the same room—as concepts are tested.
“Video offers new intimacy, subtlety and understanding to large-scale online qualitative market research by letting you see the book beneath the cover,” said Gigi Wang, CEO of Invoke Solutions. “Also, Invoke LIVE’s enhanced real-time sentiment analysis capabilities support dozens of world languages, giving multinational companies a global view of consumer sentiment.”
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive


