Kavi Global Cited By Gartner In The 2017 Market Guide For Data Science And Machine Learning

03 Jan 2018

Kavi Global has been cited by Gartner in its Market Guide for Data Science and Machine Learning Service Providers published in October 2017
Kavi Global Cited by Gartner in the 2017 Market Guide for Data Science and Machine Learning Service Providers
Kavi Global, the boutique Data Analytics Services, Platforms and Solutions firm based in Barrington, Greater Chicago Land, has been cited by Gartner in its Market Guide for Data Science and Machine Learning Service Providers published in October 2017. According to the report, “data and analytics leaders looking for support for their data science and machine learning projects should use this research to identify and engage with candidate service providers to fill the analytics deficit and augment their existing data scientists with specific skills.”
Vijitha Kaduwela
“We are very excited about this recognition by Gartner. Our Service Delivery Team, backed by the R&D team, has a proven track record of helping out clients accelerate and scale analytics. We have been able to deliver comparative TCO savings exceeding 30% both in traditional Data Warehousing / BI type of projects, as well as modern implementations such as Big Data and IoT,” says Vijitha Kaduwela, Founder and CEO, Kavi Global. Kavi Global has been serving fortune 500 and mid-market clients since 2008. Enterprise clients have preferred Kavi Global for its ability to provide comprehensive Data Analytics Services rivaling large consulting firms, combined with the agility and the personalized service of a boutique firm.
“We have seen a convergence of software and service offerings in the market place. We evolved our delivery strategy accordingly. Our client success stories have elevated us to a premiere service provider in the industry. This recognition would not have been possible without the passion, curiosity and the dedication of our Data Scientists and Data Engineers, who focus on business outcomes and deliver the next generation of solutions,” added Vignesh Balasubramanian, the VP of Service Delivery at Kavi Global.
“As our clients are gaining momentum in their data science and machine learning initiatives, we have made our own transformation from a Consulting Services firm to a Services, Platform and Solutions company, responding to the market need for a more comprehensive offering. Our heavy investment in R&D focusing in emerging technologies, has resulted in our innovative platform Plexa,” Vijitha adds.
“Plexa platform is designed to integrate technologies offered by commercial vendors and emerging open-source technologies while providing a unified, code-free, collaborative development interface to the data engineers, data scientists and subject matter experts. While increasing the productivity of delivery teams, Plexa makes the transition from traditional to modem data analytics paradigms easy,” says Rajesh Inbasekaran, VP of R&D at Kavi Global. The Data Science and Machine Learning module of Plexa is called Advana.


