Toshiba Unveils First Windows-based Smart Glasses Solution

14 Mar 2018

Toshiba’s dynaEdge™ AR Smart Glasses Redefines How a Wearable Windows PC is Used in the Field
Toshiba’s Client Solutions Division (CSD) a division of Toshiba America Information Systems, Inc., today announced the first completely wearable Augmented Reality (AR) solution to combine the power of a Windows 10 Pro PC with the robust feature set of industrial-grade smart glasses. Designed for enterprise customers, Toshiba’s new dynaEdgeTM AR Smart Glasses packages together the company’s new dynaEdge AR100 Head Mounted Display (HMD) with its dynaEdge DE-100 Mobile Mini PC for a completely wearable PC system maximizing mobility, productivity and security without compromising flexibility.
Toshiba announces wearable AR solution to combine the power of a #Windows 10 Pro PC with smart glasses. #AR #Intel
Toshiba’s new AR solution provides Document Viewing, Live Video Calls, See-What-I-See, Photo/Video Capture, Alerts/Messaging, Workflow Instruction and Barcode Scanning capabilities making it ideal for a variety of uses cases, including Maintenance, Remote Expert, Manufacturing, QA Inspection & Audit, Logistics, Training and Knowledge Transfer. Available in the second quarter with a starting MSRP of $1,899.99, the dynaEdge AR Smart Glasses is offered in various configurations with processor, memory and storage options as well as developer’s kits for different industrial applications.
“For decades, Toshiba has been instrumental in streamlining the operations of businesses around the world through cutting-edge, mobile computing technologies. Much like how laptops have increased office productivity by enabling workers to take their PCs with them anywhere they go, we believe that wearable PCs combined with smart glasses will take on-the-job productivity to a whole new dimension,” said Carl Pinto, vice president, marketing and engineering, Client Solutions Division, Toshiba America Information Systems, Inc. “We developed the dynaEdge AR Smart Glasses to help businesses mobilize their frontline and field workers and improve business outcomes with powerful PC solutions that can go anywhere they go without being obstructive. For the first time, a Windows-based PC can be worn to provide augmented reality for the job site, and operated using voice and touch HMD technologies, keeping hands free for hands-on work.”
Weighing in at less than two ounces, the wearable Toshiba AR100 Head Mounted Display is extremely lightweight and used with either the left or right eye based on user preference. It features an integrated micro display that provides a viewing experience equivalent to a 4.1-inch display seen at 14 inches. The HMD has an integrated touchpad, GPS, three-axis accelerometer with a gyroscope for head tracking, 5MP POV camera, speaker and dual noise-canceling microphones that are ideal for voice communications.
To enhance the overall functionality of the dynaEdge AR Smart Glasses, Toshiba offers a variety of mounting options to create a solution that can truly operate in any work environment. Options such as Lens-less Frame, Safety Frame, Safety Helmet Mounts and Headband deliver the flexibility and comfort demanded by enterprises deploying wearable solutions. The AR100 HMD was developed in a partnership with Vuzix Corporation.
Paul Travers
“We are excited to partner with a world-class organization like Toshiba to bring to market together the first Windows-based smart glasses solution. We look forward to a long-term collaboration between the companies on this and future programs,” said Paul Travers, President and Chief Executive Officer at Vuzix.
Measuring 6.5 x 3.3 x 0.8 inches thin and weighing less than 11 ounces, Toshiba’s wearable dynaEdge DE-100 Mobile Mini PC features a five-button, on-device navigation system to enable up/down, left/right toggles as well as an enter button. By combining that with the swipe and tap functionality afforded by the integrated touch pad on the dynaEdge AR100 Head Mounted Display, users can easily navigate, find, open and operate applications seamlessly without needing a traditional keyboard and mouse. Toshiba also included a finger print sensor for quick and secure access to the dynaEdge AR Smart Glasses. To support around the clock operations, Toshiba engineered the dynaEdge DE-100 with a removable battery and offers an optional external battery charger that charges four batteries simultaneously.
Peter Han
As Toshiba’s first enterprise-grade mobile wearable AR solution running Windows 10 Pro, the dynaEdge AR Smart Glasses seamlessly integrates into an organization’s existing infrastructure and IT security.
“We are thrilled that Toshiba is building innovative intelligent edge solutions that take advantage of the power and security of Windows 10 Pro,” said Peter Han, Vice President, Partner Devices and Solutions, Microsoft. “The DynaEdge AR Smart Glasses is a unique mobile solution that empowers industrial workers by providing the flexibility and security they need to be productive whether they’re in the office or out on a job site.”
 


