Ahead Of Holiday Season, Skyrocket Releases New Sky Viper V2450 GPS Drone

24 Oct 2017

Skyrocket Makes High-Tech Drones More Accessible to the Everyday Consumer
As the number one seller of toy drones YTD August 2017*, according to NPD, Skyrocket LLC launched its new edition, the Sky Viper V2450 GPS Streaming Video Drone. Featuring a return-to-home button as well as a built-in GPS, the Sky Viper GPS Drone outperforms every drone in its class. The newest drone in Skyrocket’s Sky Viper family is made with best-in-class ArduPilot firmware and utilizes positional awareness for easy navigation.
The new Sky Viper GPS Drone is one of nine different drones to choose from in the Sky Viper line, including the Sky Viper Stunt Drone, which is the number one selling toy drone in the U.S. for August 2017.
Winner of The Toy Insider’s 2018 Top Tech 12 Holiday Toy List, the Sky Viper GPS Drone gives consumers a chance to experience the toy of the future. In addition to high-tech features, the drone boasts durability and user-friendly navigation for an unbeatable price, offering first-time drone-users a chance to experience drones with all new navigation ease.
With Sky Viper, flying is made simple – users can navigate the drone with one finger and a single joystick or maintain a stable hover in mid-air with no hands on the controller. Then, with the press of a button the built-in GPS automatically brings it home.
The Sky Viper GPS Drone uses a network of satellites for positional awareness, pinpointing its exact location in relation to the pilot. It handles the heavy lifting of basic flight so the pilot can focus on the fun. Using GPS technology to track its route, the Sky Viper GPS Drone can fly back to its launch point and land with the push of a button. Also, the Sky Viper GPS Drone continuously checks its position and self-adjusts as needed, automatically correcting for the effects of wind to maintain its coordinates.
“At Skyrocket, our mission is to constantly push the envelope on what is possible in an affordably-priced drone,” said Nelo Lucich, CEO at Skyrocket. “The Sky Viper GPS Drone is built on a very advanced autopilot system and is the most stable, easiest to fly, best Sky Viper drone ever.”


