Motista Welcomes Marketing Science And Analytics Veteran Dave Cameron As VP Of Analytics

08 Feb 2018

Cameron Brings to Motista over 20 Years Of Leadership Experience And Hands On Expertise In Data Science
Motista, a leading marketing technology company that helps business and marketing leaders accelerate growth by activating the emotional connections that predict consumer behavior, today announced that Dave Cameron has joined its team as Vice President of Analytics, a position that reports directly to Michael Mathias, President of Motista.
Dave Cameron
Mr. Cameron will spearhead the analytic production for Motista’s robust platform, including research, development and automation, as well as handle the creation and management of planning, scheduling and monitoring processes for all of Motista’s analytic work. His focus will be to ensure the continued quality and robustness of Motista’s advanced analytics on consumer emotions and behaviors to meet Motista’s elite reputation and continually exceed client standards.
Mr. Cameron brings to Motista over 20 years of leadership experience and hands on expertise in data science. He has held key positions at Nielsen, Merkle and Ameritech. Prior to joining Motista, he served as Vice President of Analytics at Target Data, where he led the development of data-driven strategies, analytics frameworks and visualization tools.
Michael Mathias
“We’re excited to tap into Dave’s unparalleled expertise in marketing research, loyalty marketing and data driven analytics, as well as his shared passion for emotional connection all of which are essential to developing a whole new depth of predictive intelligence on consumers. Motista has ambitious growth plans in 2018 and beyond, and Dave’s ability to lead a high-performing team responsible for the development and delivery of data driven solutions that improve marketing performance will be essential as we move forward,” said Michael Mathias, President of Motista.
Motista’s predictive intelligence enables business leaders to accelerate growth by activating Emotional Connection. Using big data that ties emotions to behaviors, Motista delivers solutions that generate up to 100% gains in customer value. Leaders in retail, packaged goods, technology, financial services, healthcare and hospitality have used Motista’s predictive intelligence to target and acquire more profitable customers, significantly increase lifetime value and position their brands for differentiation and profitability.
Read More: Timicoin, First Mobile Platform To Deploy Blockchain Technology To Store Medical Records


