ŠKODA AUTO Digilab Israel Ltd Collaborates With 10 Israeli Startups

07 Jun 2018

The Focus Of The Collaboration Is On The Topics Of Big Data, Cyber Security, Car Sensors, Industry 4.0, Connected Car, E-Mobility And Infotainment
ŠKODA AUTO DigiLab Israel Ltd is ŠKODA AUTO’s scout looking for start-ups in Tel Aviv to collaborate on future shared business ideas. At the end of 2017, ŠKODA AUTO founded the joint venture together with the Israeli importer Champion Motors. At the beginning of 2018, the team at ŠKODA AUTO DigiLab Israel Ltd started work and is currently collaborating with ten start-ups. Four of these are already in a concrete project development phase.
Skoda Auto DigiLab Israel team, Tel Aviv
Read More: Singapore Implements Artificial Intelligence Governance And Ethics Initiatives
“With ŠKODA AUTO DigiLab Israel Ltd we are represented in the heart of one of the most dynamic IT locations worldwide,” said Andre Wehner, Chief Digital Officer at ŠKODA AUTO. “Israel is a high-calibre source for digital innovation. To have a presence there and to gain direct access to innovative projects, high-tech start-ups and IT talent is of great importance for ŠKODA.”
Jarmila Plachá
Jarmila Plachá, Head of the ŠKODA AUTO DigiLab, added, “ŠKODA AUTO DigiLab Israel Ltd is currently collaborating with ten start-ups. With four of these, we are already in a concrete project development phase.”
Read More: GRIMM Launches Michigan Cybersecurity Research Lab For Automobility And Aerospace Industries
In addition to its headquarters in Prague, the ŠKODA AUTO DigiLab has also been represented through the joint venture in Tel Aviv since January 2018. The city is considered to be a hotspot for the young start-up scene and IT experts of tomorrow. ŠKODA AUTO DigiLab Israel Ltd is continuously looking for innovative projects which have potential for future business models of the long-established Czech brand. The focus of the collaboration is on the topics of big data, cyber security, car sensors, Industry 4.0, connected car, e-mobility and infotainment. ŠKODA AUTO Digilab Israel Ltd cooperates in Israel with the new established Volkswagen Group Campus Tel Aviv.
With the 2025 Strategy, ŠKODA AUTO has defined the key points for its future development. Electromobility, autonomous driving and digitalization are essential cornerstones of the future company development. Here, the ŠKODA AUTO DigiLab in Prague, which was founded at the beginning of 2017, plays a key role by strengthening the Czech manufacturer’s innovative capability and digital development expertise, amongst other things.
Read More: How Virtual Nurses Are Elevating Patient Care


