Dornier MedTech Launches First Smart Lithotripter Using Big Data

18 May 2018

The New Dornier Delta III SmartLitho Can Utilize Dornier’s Proprietary Analytic Algorithm, Which Is Able To Provide Real-World Data From Extracorporeal Shockwave Lithotripsy (ESWL) Treatments Of Urological Stones By Validating Against A Broad Set Of Data Points Collected Globally
Dornier MedTech (Dornier), a global leader in innovative kidney stone management, today announced the launch of Dornier Delta III SmartLitho, the world’s first lithotripter system which uses big data in urology, at the American Urology Association (AUA) Annual Meeting 2018.
Read More: Interview With Dr. Spincer Koh, CEO, Gorilla Technology Group
The new Dornier Delta III SmartLitho can utilize Dornier’s proprietary analytic algorithm, which is able to provide real-world data from extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) treatments of urological stones by validating against a broad set of data points collected globally. The novel algorithm enables urologists to make personalized, evidence-based decisions by assessing historical success rates of treatment modalities as well as identify and balance costs.
Abel Ang
Abel Ang, President and CEO of Dornier MedTech said: “As a global leader in innovative kidney stone management, we are excited to be the first in the world to roll out a feature for ESWL users that uses the power of big data and analytics.
Read More: Meet 20 Of The Most Influential People In The Cryptocurrency World
“Using Dornier’s data driven technology, urologists using our best-selling lithotripter now have access to a broad range of clinical data points and information to make evidence-based medical decisions. This ultimately can lead to more efficient healthcare delivery and better patient outcomes.”
About 1 in 11 Americans will have a kidney stone at some point in their lifetime, with more than 50% of patients experiencing one or more recurrences. The prevalence of stone diseases doubled over the last 15 years and cost the U.S. health system US$10 billion per year.i,ii
Read More: Interview With Laszlo Kishonti, CEO At AImotive
Dornier MedTech will exhibit the new Dornier Delta III SmartLithoTM at booth 1645 at AUA 2018.


