Chowbotics Announces That Sally The Salad Robot Is Now Food Safety And Sanitation Certified

13 Feb 2018

UL and NSF-25 safety and sanitation certifications open the door for a comprehensive roll-out of Sally at target locations
Food robotics company Chowbotics announces that its first product, a salad-making robot called Sally, recently passed the UL and NSF-25 safety and sanitation standards.
To obtain these certifications, Sally the Salad Robot underwent and passed an evaluation at Underwriters Laboratories (UL) to ensure it and the facility where it is produced meet specific standards for food safety. The certification indicates that Sally meets health and safety standards for use in commercial establishments.
Offices, convenience stores, hotels, airports as well as fast casual restaurants are places that can use Sally to bring fresh, healthy and delicious food to consumers. These certifications open the door for a comprehensive roll-out of Sally at these target locations.
Sally offers over 1,000 custom salad options. Salads are created in less than a minute and a half with any combination of up to 22 ingredients, and users can fine tune the calorie total by adding or subtracting ingredients via touchscreen.
Like a vending machine, Sally doesn’t require staffing; it can whip up salads around the clock, making it ideal for employers who want to provide options for when the cafeteria is closed, hotel operators who want to give guests an array of a healthy choices beyond the minibar and convenience store operators wanting to provide a quick, fresh meal for commuters on the go.
Sally’s proprietary technology reduces the risk of foodborne illness, as ingredients are kept refrigerated, sanitary and separate. Each of Sally’s ingredients is replenished on a regular basis and contained within the robot, greatly reducing the potential for contamination. Sally is an ideal alternative to a salad bar, especially in higher-risk facilities such as schools, retirement homes and hospitals.
 


