Bidalgo Announces Support Of Playable Ads On Facebook And Other Platforms, Offers Free Ad Production For Qualifying Advertisers

11 May 2018

Clients increase click-through rates of Facebook playables by 50 percent using Bidalgo’s AI-based ad automation software and services
Bidalgo, a leading provider of ad creative automation software and services for app marketers, announced today the launch of a new suite of products and services to support playable ads on Facebook and other leading ad platforms. The announcement comes as Facebook makes playable ads available on its platform to allow users to sample a game or app before installing it, helping drive higher quality installs. One of the first Facebook Marketing Partners (FMP’s) to support the platform’s new playable ad units, Bidalgo also enables advertisers to quickly and easily deploy playables on Google’s UAC.
Bidalgo provides a comprehensive suite of products and services to support playable ads, including creative design and production, Artificial Intelligence-based media buying for optimal targeting and placement, and advanced creative analytics tools to show how assets’ performance measures up against other ads in the same industry. All services are provided free of charge for Bidalgo’s fully managed clients, or they can be purchased on a self-serve basis as well. With Bidalgo, advertisers can create and deploy playable ads in about 24 hours, without using development resources, as opposed to the several days it tends to take for marketers to do it on their own.
Bidalgo has been testing Facebook playables during the program’s beta period, and in that time Bidalgo clients have been able to increase click-through rate by 50 percent and Average Revenue Per Paying User (ARPPU) by 33 percent in just a few weeks by using Bidalgo’s AI-based ad automation software and services.
Peli Beeri
“We are extremely proud to serve as a trusted marketing partner for Facebook as they roll out this important and increasingly popular ad format,” said Peli Beeri. “Our clients have seen promising results with playables on Facebook already and through other channels as well, and our goal is to give them the tools and resources they need to not only get up and running quickly, but to master the format so that they drive performance to take their apps to the top of the charts.”
Playables are among the most promising ad units for app marketers because their ability to let users try a game before deciding to download it helps drive higher intent for app installs. Bidalgo brings industry-leading expertise and cross-channel experience to Facebook playables, while enabling advertisers to leverage the format on other platforms as well.


