Listrak And Persado Announce Strategic Integration 

25 Apr 2018

The Partnership Combines Persado’s AI-generated Marketing Language With Listrak’s Automation And Analytics Platform
Listrak, a customer analytics CRM and cross-channel marketing automation platform, today announced a strategic partnership with Persado, a leading provider of AI-generated marketing language, to help brands generate the exact language that will resonate most with their audience and drive business results.
The collaboration will integrate Persado’s Pro Email AI-content generation platform with Listrak’s CRM digital marketing automation platform, enabling Listrak clients to generate subject line content best predicted to boost performance, and then review and deploy those subject lines directly within Listrak with only a few clicks.
Ross Kramer
“All subject lines are not created equal,” said Ross Kramer, CEO, Listrak. “Listrak and Persado share the philosophy that personalizing the customer experience is key. Combining Persado’s AI-powered technology to generate specific words and emotions that resonate with any given audience with Listrak’s leading marketing automation platform will allow marketers to connect their customers with the products they love, using the language that is most relevant to them. The result is increased engagement and increased ROI.”
Persado CEO Alex Vratskides added: “We’re excited to partner with Listrak to get our integrated solution into the hands of more marketers. Using Persado’s AI-powered marketing language cloud within Listrak’s automation and analytics platform, marketers will have a unique and powerful solution to reach customers like never before, and ultimately give them the disruptive edge necessary to be successful.”
“As a dedicated Listrak customer we were thrilled to see a native integration with Persado, which has provided a 25% lift in open rates and a 102% lift in click through rates for our e-mail program,” says Benjamin Lowrey of Event Decor Direct. “Using Persado has taken the guesswork out of creating effective subject lines and elevated our messaging and engagement!”
The integration of Persado Pro within Listrak is completed and available to clients now. For more information about Listrak, please visit listrak.com.
Read More: 10 Celebrities Who Are Investing In AI Startups


