MeaningCloud Cited In Independent AI-Based Text Analytics Platforms Report

11 May 2018

MeaningCloud has been cited in Forrester’s “Now Tech: AI-Based Text Analytics Platforms, Q2 2018” report
MeaningCloud, a leading Text Analytics and Semantic Analysis vendor today announced that Forrester Research, Inc. has included its platform in its “Now Tech: AI-Based Text Analytics Platforms, Q2 2018” report. This Now Tech report helps professionals choose from a diverse set of Text Analytics vendors — vendors that vary by size, functionality, geography, and vertical market focus.
In the report, MeaningCloud is categorized as a general-purpose text analytics platform, that are characterized by addressing a broad set of text analytics use cases, and including functionality to ingest, integrate, cleanse, mine, enrich, and analyze text from most popular unstructured and semistructured data sources and data types.
MeaningCloud platform helps companies in any industry extract the meaning of unstructured content in a variety of context-aware applications. Its deep Semantic Analytics approach, grounded on an advanced understanding of text, enables the extraction of deep insights from complex documents and interactions, like contracts or contact center conversations.
Jose C. Gonzalez
“Among the Text Analytics solutions, MeaningCloud’s secret sauce consists in a combination of: 1. Deep Semantic Technology, boosting precision over pure Machine Learning approaches; 2. Open customization tools, empowering integrators and final clients to better fit their use cases; 3. A sound API platform, with thrilling performance and ease of integration”, said Jose C. Gonzalez, CEO of MeaningCloud.
Now Tech: AI-Based Text Analytics Platforms, Q2 2018
Customers can use AI-based text analytics platforms to improve customer acquisition, service, and retention; manage governance, risk management, and compliance processes; and gain efficiencies with robotic process automation. Forrester’s “Now Tech: AI-Based Text Analytics Platforms” report helps professionals working on text analytics initiatives understand the value they can expect from an AI-based text analytics platform provider and select vendors based on size and functionality.
 


