Cerego Launches Cerego Insights™ And Skill For Amazon Alexa

29 Jun 2018

New offering surfaces cognitive and behavioral insights based on learning patterns to improve talent assessment in both corporate and educational settings
Cerego Insights™ uses machine learning models to objectively understand learners’ cognitive and behavioral strengths, and predict future performance.
The new Cerego Insights™ offering goes beyond the company’s core competency of knowledge acquisition and memory management. Instructors and managers can now instantly access each individual and group’s cognitive and behavioral profile.
These attributes include specific, validated scores for Agility, Diligence, and Knowledge. The data-driven models powering Cerego Insights™ have broad implications for not just learning but the full range of recruiting, training, and retaining talent.
Follow Us
Andrew Smith
“What this means is that we can provide a more holistic view of performance and capability, driven entirely by a user’s experiences learning on our platform,” said co-founder and CEO Andrew Smith Lewis. “For example, this new data can identify high-potential job candidates based on cognitive and behavioral strengths our customers might otherwise overlook. A resume or reference can only tell you so much. Finally, we have a useful index for talent management throughout the employment lifecycle. These are the people analytics we’ve always dreamed of providing.”
Cerego’s flagship system accelerates learning and retention, providing a data-driven model for assessing knowledge and capability for both individuals and groups. The company serves more than 500 schools and corporations, helping learners everywhere learn faster, retain better, and remember longer.
Read More: Mensia Technologies Raises 1.3 Million Euro To Introduce Koala Neurofeedback In Europe
From dental education at New York University, to call center training at Target, to combat lifesaving pilots within US government agencies, and Gates Foundation-funded STEM courses for at risk and underserved learners at over 300 community colleges, Cerego’s mission is to accelerate human intelligence everywhere and for everyone.
Educators can use the Cerego skill for Amazon Alexa by simply asking questions like, “Alexa, how are my learners doing on this week’s assignment?” or “Alexa, who are my most diligent learners?” to discover highlights and actionable insights from Cerego Insights™ about their students, all through Amazon Alexa’s voice-based intelligence. Arizona State University will be the launch partner in this initial release.
Read More: Interview With Gabby Nizri, CEO And Co-Founder, Ayehu
Phil Regier
“We have worked with Cerego since 2015 in our Global Freshman Academy,” said Phil Regier, University Dean for Educational Initiatives and CEO of EdPlus at Arizona State University, which has been ranked the nation’s most innovative university for three straight years by U.S. News and World Report and is a leader in online education.
“The Cerego system has been a valuable addition in fostering student success, allowing us to personalize programs, identify what students know, what they need to know, and when is the best time for each individual student to learn what they need to progress.” Regier added. “We expect that the addition of Cerego Insights™ and the company’s new Amazon Alexa skill will allow our faculty to more easily access information about their classes and thereby achieve better outcomes for their students.”
Read More: Interview With Robert Schwarz, Managing Director ANZ, Nuance Communications
Research shows that more instructor engagement leads to more engaged learners, and ultimately better results. Cerego is committed to reducing friction for instructors; the new Alexa skill will have a positive impact on outcomes by integrating behavioral and cognitive insights into teachers’ daily workflow in the most natural way possible.
Just as importantly, the Cerego system streamlines content creation, using NLP to augment the process, dramatically reducing the time and costs required to generate learning content. Available through web and mobile apps, Cerego can also be embedded into existing platforms and can ultimately be connected via API to smart Internet of Things (IoT) or voice devices.
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
These announcements come on the heels of 18 months of rapid customer growth for Cerego, across multiple verticals simultaneously.
500+ schools and faculty across the U.S. and around the world have adopted Cerego. Top companies from healthcare to financial services are using Cerego, including multiple yet-to-be-announced investees of SoftBank’s Vision Fund. Elsevier, McGraw Hill, Cengage, and others are leveraging Cerego to reach learners from K12 to professional education. In the government sector, pilots with US government agencies have seen 40% reduction in training time with Cerego, plus gains of up to 3x compared to traditional training methods.
Read More: Dassault Aviation And Airbus Join Forces On Future Combat Air System


