ARTiFACTS And Innovative Education Services Partner; Use Blockchain In Scholarly Communication

19 Jun 2018

Leading Academic Research Consulting Firm in Asia-Pacific Region to Use Blockchain-Based Collaboration Platform to Enhance Visibility of Researcher Achievements
ARTiFACTS, creator of the world’s first blockchain-based platform for scholarly research, and Innovative Education Services (ies), the Asia-Pacific based consulting firm focused on enhancing quality and global visibility of Asian-Pacific scientific research, have formed a partnership to advance the use of blockchain in scholarly communications. Under this partnership, ARTiFACTS and ies will work together to expand the use of blockchain technology to help academic institutions, their researchers, and funding organizations throughout the Asia-Pacific region improve speed, collaboration, access, transparency, and attribution in scholarly research.
ies will train its clients on the ARTiFACTS platform and will also provide access for these clients to start using the platform to establish proof of existence for research outputs, share research artifacts, and provide and receive immutable attribution in real-time during the research process. Researchers will benefit from the ability to easily and securely share in-process work to speed collaboration and build reputation as research is conducted. Academic institutions will benefit from the enhanced visibility of world-class research created by their investigators, improving their enterprise reputation and introducing new collaborative opportunities. Funding organizations will sharpen their understanding of the outcomes and impact of their research grants.
Read More: Cognizant’s Netcentric Named 2018 Adobe Experience Cloud Partner Of The Year In EMEA
David Kochalko
“ARTiFACTS and ies are both focused on addressing challenges in scholarly communications to improve the visibility of research outputs, accelerate the research cycle, and enhance recognition of researchers’ achievements in real-time,” said ARTiFACTS Chief Academic Officer and Co-Founder, Dave Kochalko. “Our partnership will help achieve these objectives, expand our respective user communities, and also enhance connections among researchers and their institutions in Asia-Pacific with their counterparts globally.”
Woei Fuh Wong
The two entities have agreed to pursue implementations of the ARTiFACTS platform with leading academic research institutions and research funding organizations in Asia-Pacific. In turn, these institutions will make the ARTiFACTS platform available to the scholars and scientists they support. Collectively, this collaboration will bring the benefits of a blockchain-based approach to scholarly knowledge and attribution dissemination to a region experiencing rapid growth in outputs and interest from the global community.
Read More: Interview With Dorian Selz, Co-Founder & CEO, Squirro
“This is an exciting opportunity for us to offer expanded research outreach solutions, helping researchers to improve the visibility of their work,” said Woei Fuh Wong, the General Manager for Consulting at ies. “This synergistic partnership helps to promote open science and strengthen the values of transparency and reproducibility in th fast-growing Asia Pacific research community.”


