Amper Music Raises $4M To Fuel Growth Of Artificial Intelligence Music Composition Technology

24 Mar 2018

Funding Enables Amper Music To Expand Internationally And Scale Internal Resources To Meet Rising Global Popularity
Amper Music, the world’s first artificial intelligence (AI) music composer, performer, and producer that lets you instantly create and customize original music without needing any prior music experience, today announced it has raised an additional $4 million seed round. The financing was led by Horizons Ventures with Two Sigma Ventures, Advancit Capital, Foundry Group and Kiwi Venture Partners also participating. This brings the company’s total investment to $9 million.
Amper will use the latest funding to expand the company’s presence internationally, and it plans to double its employee base in the US to meet the growing customer desire for scalable, high-quality music creation.
Drew Silverstein
“Amper’s rapid growth is a testament to how the massive growth of media requires a technological solution for music creation,” said Drew Silverstein, CEO and Co-founder of Amper Music. “Amper’s value stems not only from the means to collaborate and create music through AI, but also from its ability to help power media at a global scale.”
Founded by Hollywood film composers Drew Silverstein, Sam Estes, and Michael Hobe, Amper Music is for anyone around the world who uses, consumes or creates music. Amper is especially appealing to content creators and developers. Using Amper, content creators can simplify their workflow and avoid the time, budgetary, and licensing frustrations of stock music. The music created with Amper receives a global, royalty-free, and perpetual license, eliminating the many legal and financial hurdles of traditional music licensing. Users can select a mood, genre and track duration, then customize the track with a multitude of easy-to-use editing functionality. Amper also serves as a creative partner to artists, musicians, and composers, who can collaborate with Amper in the creation of their own music.
“Music is inherently a cross-cultural and geographically boundless experience,” said Phil Chen, Advisor at Horizon Ventures. “That factor coupled with the rising intrigue of mixing music and machines well positions Amper for global expansion.”
“We’re excited to continue to support Amper through this next phase of growth and expansion,” says Colin Beirne of Two Sigma Ventures. “Amper continues to push the envelope in delivering AI-powered music composition technology, giving its content-rich customers and partners access to high-quality customized music at the touch of a button.”
Amper Music is the world’s first artificial intelligence (AI) music platform that empowers media creators to effortlessly collaborate with Amper’s web application and API to craft and customize original music, instantly, without needing any prior music experience. From video to gaming and other interactive technologies, Amper powers the music for all forms of media content. Amper enables creators to avoid the time, budgetary, and licensing frustrations of stock music. Through its simplified workflow, creators can produce original soundtracks without leaving their existing platform.


