Wirecard Selects Astute Solutions For Conversational Service Chatbot Technology

13 Feb 2018

Leader in fintech chooses Astute Bot™ to power mobile payment product, boon by Wirecard.
Astute Solutions today announced their selection by Wirecard, a leading global specialist in digital financial technology, to implement Astute’s chatbot software into the boon app – Europe’s fastest-growing mobile payment solution. Astute Bot will enable boon users to receive personalized service interactions through a messaging interface, creating a smooth, frictionless experience. In recent years, Wirecard began using artificial intelligence in its risk management systems, and is now implementing AI-fueled features in the field of consumer interactions and customer support.
Conversational AI #chatbot from @astutesolutions to enhance service experience for boon. by @wirecard customers.
boon by Wirecard is the only mobile payment solution in Europe that is completely independent from any bank. The app allows users to make mobile, contactless payments at NFC-capable point of sale locations. Launched in 2015, boon is currently available in Germany, Austria, Netherlands, Belgium, Ireland, Spain, United Kingdom, France, Switzerland, and Italy.
Georg von Waldenfels
Astute Bot, driven by narrow artificial intelligence and natural language processing, won multiple awards for the best new software product of 2017. The chatbot product creates conversational interactions with customers, determining the intent of the request and the best answer from multiple data sources, including authored content, external sources and other business systems. Astute and Wirecard plan to soon expand this offering to more of Wirecard’s business customers.
Richard Jones
“By continuously expanding its value proposition, boon by Wirecard has become an advanced mobile payment ecosystem, which is far beyond payment-only,” said Georg von Waldenfels, Executive Vice President Consumer Solutions at Wirecard. “We are excited to soon be offering a further enhanced consumer interaction experience which is well advanced versus market standard.”
“Customers have higher expectations than ever before when it comes to simple, yet sophisticated, services,” said Richard Jones, Senior Vice President of Global Sales at Astute Solutions. “Boon users will be able to use Astute Bot to interact with the innovative services being offered how they want, when they want.”
 


