McCann Inks Deal With First Blockchain Company, Job.com

11 Apr 2018

World-renowned Advertising Agency To Provide Design And Creative Services For Pioneering Blockchain-Based Recruitment Platform
Following the announcement of its blockchain-based job matching platform, Job.com today announced that it is the first blockchain company to work with the world’s leading advertising agency, McCann. With over 100 years of experience and offices in 120 countries, McCann has worked with some of the largest, global brands including Coca-Cola, Nescafe, Microsoft, Mastercard, and GM. Now taking on its first client in the blockchain sector, McCann is leading the creative efforts for Job.com as the platform prepares for its launch later this year.
Rob Mustoe, Managing Director of McCann Birmingham, said “We have worked with the leadership team at Job.com for a number of years, so when we were asked to help with the brand and the platform, we jumped at the chance. Job.com is a disruptive idea built on cutting edge technology and this is a really exciting project and is drawing a lot of attention within the agency. It has the potential to genuinely move the market and redefine what the industry is really about. The business has the right leadership, strategic partnerships, and frankly, the right brand.”
McCann is supporting Job.com with a variety of services at both a Strategic and Creative level, including; the development of the Job.com brand, creation of B2B & B2C advertising campaigns, production of necessary advertising collateral and customer relationship management. Their digital team will support by working on the Job.com platform, by providing User Experience, Web Design, and Front End Build.
Dean Lovett, CEO of McCann Birmingham, said “We work with a real cross-section of clients across all sectors and of all shapes and sizes. A lot of startups talk about doing things better. Job.com feels like one of the rare ones that have a proposition to deliver better things. We have a track record of taking startups to significant growth and becoming industry leaders – we think that Job.com has the potential to be the next story like this.”
Paul Sloyan of Job.com said “McCann’s reputation and legacy are second to none in the advertising space. We knew we wanted to work with them from the start and the fact that we will be their first blockchain-based client makes it all the more special. In a space where trust, branding, and legitimacy are of the utmost importance to our community, there is no better partner to portray Job.com’s message effectively than McCann. The recruitment revolution we are building is no simple feat, but as long as we maintain this level of dedication towards our goal and continue to partner with those that stand as pillars of their industries, there is little that can get in the way of our recruitment revolution.”
Job.com is an industry-leading job search platform with over 60 million users worldwide. Utilizing blockchain technology, Job.com allows companies and job seekers to connect directly, removing recruiters from the hiring process and redistributing those fees to successful candidates as a 5% signing bonus.
Job.com is a blockchain-based job matching platform taking on the $638B global recruiting industry.  With a mission of igniting the ‘Recruitment 3.0’ movement, Job.com allows companies and job seekers to connect directly without the intervention of a recruiter as a middleman.  Job.com offers a cheaper, streamlined approach for companies of all sizes to more efficiently find, place, and reward new employees without commission fees, while providing job seekers a more secure way of finding a job with the opportunity to be rewarded with a 5% signing bonus.


