Influential And Oracle’s Moat Collaborate To Measure Viewability For Social Media Influencer Campaigns

15 May 2018

Influential, the leading A.I. influencer technology and Social Intelligence™ firm, announced it is working with Oracle’s Moat, a SaaS analytics measurement provider for marketers and publishers that is part of the Oracle Data Cloud, to deliver viewability and attention metrics on Influential’s platform. The collaboration incorporates Moat’s viewability and attention metrics with Influential’s social media influencer marketplace to provide marketers and advertisers deeper insights to better assess their influencer campaign performance.
Influential And Oracle’s Moat Collaborate To Measure Viewability For Social Media Influencer Campaigns
The collaboration provides Influential customers with Moat measurement for display and video content across major social platforms, for brands in various industries including entertainment, telecom, CPG, retail, and automotive. The insights allow brands to optimize their content and add another layer of multivariate testing to ultimately lower spend and increase viewable impressions.
Utilizing Influential’s technology and methodology, the campaign for National Geographic’s show The Long Road Home had some very impressive results. A top post from an influencer had an On-Screen percentage that was 57 percent higher than the baseline and had 65 percent more Valid and Viewable impressions.
Ryan Detert
“The wild west of social media metrics will only be tamed with transparent data and accountability,” said Ryan Detert, CEO of Influential. “With Oracle’s Moat, now brands are able to see third-party validation on the key metrics to measure success for all influencer campaigns.”
Jonah Goodhart
“Our collaboration with Influential allows brands to reach the right audiences and arms them with metrics to validate the success of their influencer campaigns and creative content,” said Jonah Goodhart, SVP of Oracle Data Cloud and Co-Founder of Moat. “The results show that consumers respond well to authentic branded content from trusted voices when correctly matched to the brand.”
Influential has a unique approach using social data to garner the best results. They use a 3-pronged system to match the best influencer and their content to a brand’s audience, based on demographic, contextual, and psychographic relevance. This is another proof point that authentic content made by trusted voices leads to not only more engagements, but also better attention metrics and ROI.


