Cyberbit Hosted A First Joint Cyberdefense Exercise For German And Israeli Financial Institutions

27 Jun 2018

Cybersecurity Teams From Both Countries Collaborated For Advanced Simulation Training And Shared Expertise And Techniques
Cyberbit Ltd., a world-leading provider of cybersecurity simulation and IT/OT detection and response platforms, and Finanz Informatik GmbH and Co.(“FI”), the central IT service provider of the German Savings Banks Finance Group, announced today they held their first joint cybersecurity training exercise at Cyberbit headquarters in Raanana, Israel. Cybersecurity professionals of all levels and professions, from leading German and Israeli banks held a five-day joint exercise where they practiced defending against a wide variety of the most dangerous cyberattacks threatening financial organizations today.
The teams convened in Israel to train on the Cyberbit Range training and simulation platform. The Cyberbit Range technology can simulate multiple network environments and allows teams to realistically experience different types of advanced multi-stage cyberattacks and manage the events from start to finish, both operationally and technically. The teams ran simulations of different attack vector currently looming over the financial institutions around the world.
Lutz Bleyer
“FI is always pushing to stay well ahead of the cybercriminals,” said Lutz Bleyer, Chief Information Security Officer at Finanz Informatik. “I initiated this joint training to give our team a chance to work together with the excellent infosec professionals in Israel and learn from one another in a realistic setting.”
Yochai Corem
“The teams were very impressed with the technical capabilities on both sides,” said Yochai Corem, VP EMEA, Cyberbit. “Simulation training is a must-have experience for every financial organization that wants to keep their teams up-to-date and we are looking forward to hosting more joint trainings with cybersecurity teams from leading European banks.”
Read More: Innovative AI To Help You Get To The Heart Of Your Customers’ Needs
The joint exercise was facilitated with the support of the Trade and Economic Mission at the Israeli Embassy in Berlin.
Created to protect extremely high-risk organizations worldwide, Cyberbit secures enterprises and critical infrastructure against advanced cyberthreats. The company’s battle-hardened cybersecurity solutions detect, analyze and respond to the most advanced, complex and targeted threats across IT and OT (operational technology) networks. Cyberbit employs a diverse team from both the public and private sector, including researchers, mathematicians, former CISOs and SOC managers. With offices in Texas, Singapore, Munich and Israel, and presence worldwide, Cyberbit is a subsidiary of Elbit Systems Ltd. (NASDAQ: ESLT and TASE: ESLT). To learn more about how Cyberbit maximizes protection against today’s signature-less threats.
About Cyberbit Range – The world leading cyber range, Cyberbit Range is a training and simulation platform enabling organizations to establish and manage hyper-realistic training centers proven to boost information security team performance.
Finanz Informatik (FI), headquartered in Frankfurt am Main, is the IT service provider of the German Savings Banks Finance Group and one of the largest banking-IT service provider in Europe. Customers include 390 savings banks, 7 federal state banks and DekaBank, 8 state building and loan associations, public insurers and various other companies within the Savings Banks Group and the financial services sector.
Finanz Informatik provides a full range of IT services, including the development and implementation of IT solutions, networks and technical infrastructure as well as data processing centers, consulting, training and support. With the highly efficient comprehensive banking solution OSPlus, it offers one of the leading IT systems in the German banking sector. The portfolio includes further IT services and solutions from subsidiaries and partner companies like Finanz Informatik Technologie Service, Finanz Informatik Solutions Plus, Star Finanz and inasys.
Read More: Interview With Akemi Tsunagawa, Founder And CEO, Bespoke Inc


