Daplie And USI Team Up To Manufacture First Truly Decentralized Server For The Home

20 Apr 2018

Daplie Connect Puts Security, Privacy, Ownership, And Control Of Personal Data Within Reach Of Mainstream Consumers
One of China’s premiere hardware manufacturers has partnered with Daplie to build Connect—the first plug and play decentralized server that empowers consumers to take control of their digital experiences.
USI is well known for providing design, miniaturization, material sourcing, manufacturing, logistics, and other electronic device/module services for some of the world’s biggest brands. Founded in 2003, the company is a member of ASE Group and is listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange. Their global sales and manufacturing networks service clients across North America, Europe, Japan, China, and elsewhere. USI has assembled a team of engineering PhDs who have been working with Daplie for months to design and develop complex hardware specifications. Connect is the first product of its kind to leverage blockchain technology in creating a wholly decentralized device that no one outside of the individual user—including Daplie—has access to.
Bryson Hill
“USI has been a tremendous asset for the Daplie team,” says Bryson Hill, Founder and CEO of Daplie. “Their years of hardware design and manufacturing have not only saved us significant amounts of time but have also led to the creation of a much better product. Connect is a Web 3.0 device that will be the first to give control of personal, private information back to the right person—you.”
The idea for Connect was born in 2015, and successful rounds of crowdfunding in 2017 provided the means to bring the idea to life. The vision of helping consumers take control of their digital lives—and get more privacy, security, and ownership in the process—has since expanded to incorporate blockchain technology into the hardware. This evolution will allow Connect users to update their devices via the blockchain without requiring or allowing any third-party access (including Daplie), meaning more privacy and security compared to existing hardware update processes. Each Connect will have access to the DapStore: an App Store®-like marketplace that offers secure access to updates, applications, and other services on the blockchain. Tying it all together is DapCoin, a utility token that creates a bridge between the hardware and blockchain platforms. Together Connect, DapCoin, and the DapStore build a foundation for a decentralized Web 3.0 experience. On April 19, 2018, Daplie is launching a token sale for individuals who want to support this new ecosystem and help get DapCoin into the marketplace.
Daplie Connect will also come with a host of additional product features, including secure private key management with built-in hot and cold storage wallets for cryptocurrencies, secure file management, patented stackable storage (up to 20 TB), plus the ability to add additional storage through two onboard USB ports. Daplie is currently taking pre-orders for Connect home servers pre-loaded with ClearOS through daplie.com. In the coming months USI will also help Daplie design and manufacture a handful of other, as-yet unannounced hardware products. Connect is expected to ship later this year.
USI is a global ODM/EMS leading company providing design, miniaturization, material sourcing, manufacturing, logistics, and after services of electronic devices/modules for brand owners. USI is a member of ASE Group and has been listed in Shanghai Stock Exchange in 2012. It has many years of experience in the electronics manufacturing services industry and leverages the industry-leading technology of ASE Group, which enables USI to offer customer diversify product in the sectors of wireless communication, computer and storage, consumer, industrial, and automotive electronics worldwide. Through the sales service network in North America, Europe, Japan, China, Taiwan, and manufacturing sites in China, Taiwan and Mexico. USI has about 15,000 people worldwide.
Daplie creates hardware that empowers individuals to take back control of their digital lives. The plug-and-play decentralized home server — Connect™ — sits at the center of this Web 3.0 ecosystem. It comes with ClearCenter’s advanced ClearOS operating system, fee-free storage and sharing, built-in hot and cold storage wallets for cryptocurrencies, and secure data access from anywhere and from any connected device.


