LeaseAccelerator And Genpact To Present Oracle Lease Accounting Strategies At COLLABORATE 2018

23 Apr 2018

Finance and Accounting experts share best practices for automating ASC 842 compliance using digital technologies
LeaseAccelerator will be co-presenting with Genpact at the Oracle Application User Group (OAUG) COLLABORATE 18 Conference in Las Vegas on April 23rd to discuss best practices for ASC 842 compliance. With less than nine months remaining until the initial deadlines for the new lease accounting standards (ASC 842 and IFRS 16), Oracle-centric companies will find implementing an ASC 842 project to be one of the top finance initiatives of 2018.
What: Oracle Lease Accounting Strategies
Compliance – What is the new lease accounting standard? How does it compare to the current rules? What additional financial reports and disclosures will be required?
Systems – What is lease accounting software? How does it interact with your Oracle, PeopleSoft and JD Edwards financial applications including general ledgers, accounts payable and real estate administration systems?
Implementation – What does a typical implementation project look like? What types of data needs to be collected? What types of integration need to be performed? What types of testing will be required?
Maintenance – What happens after implementation? What changes are required for the procure-to-pay and record-to-report processes? What types of policies and controls will need to be in place for SOX compliance?
During the session, attendees will see a live demonstration of an Enterprise Lease Accounting software application and hear examples of how Oracle ERP customers are using LeaseAccelerator to comply with the new standards.
Who: Vivek Saxena, Senior Vice President, Record-to-Report for Genpact
Jonathan Crawford, Chief Technology Officer for LeaseAccelerator
When: Monday, April 23rd at 1:15PM-2:15PM Pacific Daylight Time
Where: Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino – Room: Shell Seekers II
More Information: https://app.attendcollaborate.com/event/member/476915
The joint Genpact-LeaseAccelerator solution enables organizations to comply with the new ASC 842 and IFRS 16 standards using a single subledger for real estate and equipment assets. Built upon Oracle technologies, the solution offers integration with Oracle Financials applications such as the general ledger, accounts payable, and fixed asset management. LeaseAccelerator is a certified Oracle Gold Level Partner, member of the Oracle Partner Network and member of the Oracle Applications User Group (OAUG).
COLLABORATE 18: Technology and Applications Forum for the Oracle Community is where Oracle power users and IT decision makers find practical solutions for today and strategies for tomorrow. This conference empowers users of Oracle business applications and database software to gain greater value from their Oracle investments through real-world education and networking. Created by and for users, COLLABORATE provides a personalized experience alongside functional and technical insight from other experienced professionals, whether your organization seeks to maximize its on-premises solutions, evaluate a path to the cloud, or optimize your business in the cloud. Participants can expand their community and gain direct access to Oracle. COLLABORATE is jointly presented by the Independent Oracle Users Group (IOUG), the Oracle Applications Users Group (OAUG) and Quest International Users Group (Quest).


